J. R. R.
TOLKIEN
THE
ARI
EDITED BY CHRISTOPHER TOLKIEN
Illustrated by Ted NaSMITH
J.R.R. TOLKIEN
QUENTA SILMARILLION(The History of the Silmarils)
together with
AINULINDALE(The Music of the Ainur)
and
VALAQUENTA(Account of the Valar)
To which is appended
AKALLABETH(The Downfall of Numenor)
and
OF THE RINGS OF POWER AND THE THIRD AGE
n vit \nb hnCn ccf dm noo rf> mj2£ i.nb
v \n oai? ft *6 Xto hrf p Is
J.R.R. TOLKIEN
The Silmarillion
edited by
CHRISTOPHER TOLKIEN
Illustrated byTED NASMITH
HarperCollins e-books
JJ dcf o pmpp? |7) pot5n?h-£ }» makrorf p5 b> X'6pf]' Js
|a p£n p fz> hrfjv ccf xicf b>£ pz^rpfl. p hoAr? rop
Contents
J.R.R. TOLKIEN
TITLE PAGE
FOREWORD
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
FROM A LETTER BY J.R.R. TOLKIEN TO MILTON WALDMAN. 1951
AINUL INDALE
VALAOUENTA
OUENTA SILMARILLION
CHAPTER 1: OF THE BEGINNING OF DAYS
CHAPTER 2: OF AULE AND YAVANNA
CHAPTER 3: OF THE COMING OF THE ELVES AND THE CAPTIVITY OF
MELKOR
CHAPTER 4: OF THINGOL AND MELIAN
CHAPTER 5: OF ELDAMAR AND THE PRINCES OF THE EL DAL IE
CHAPTER 6: OF FEANOR AND THE UNCHAINING OF MELKOR
CHAPTER 7: OF THE SILMARILS AND THE UNREST OF THE NOLDOR
CHAPTER 8: OF THE DARKENING OF VALINOR
CHAPTER 9: OF THE FLIGHT OF THE NOLDOR
CHAPTER 10: OF THE SINDAR
CHAPTER 11: OF THE SUN AND MOON AND THE HIDING OF VALINOR
CHAPTER 12: OF MEN
CHAPTER 13: OF THE RETURN OF THE NOLDOR
CHAPTER 14: OF BELERIAND AND ITS REALMS
CHAPTER 15: OF THE NOLDOR IN BELERIAND
CHAPTER 16: OF MAEGLIN
CHAPTER 17: OF THE COMING OF MEN INTO THE WEST
CHAPTER 18: OF THE RUIN OF BELERIAND AND THE FALL OF
FINGOLFIN
CHAPTER 19: OF BEREN AND LUTHIEN
CHAPTER 20: OF THE FIFTH BATTLE: NIRNAETH ARNOEDIAD
CHAPTER 21: OF TURIN TURAMBAR
CHAPTER 22: OF THE RUIN OF DORIATH
CHAPTER 23: OF TUOR AND THE FALL OF GONDOLIN
CHAPTER 24: OF THE VOYAGE OF EARENDIL AND THE WAR OF
WRATH
AKALLABETH
OF THE RINGS OF POWER AND THE THIRD AGE
NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION
INDEX OF NAMES
APPENDIX
MAPS
WORKS BY J.R.R. TOLKIEN
COPYRIGHT PAGEABOUT THE PUBLISHER
FOREWORD
The Silmarillion, now published four years after the death of its author, is anaccount of the Elder Days, or the First Age of the World. In The Lord of theRings were narrated the great events at the end of the Third Age; but the tales ofThe Silmarillion are legends deriving from a much deeper past, when Morgoth,the first Dark Lord, dwelt in Middle-earth, and the High Elves made war uponhim for the recovery of the Silmarils.
Not only, however, does The Silmarillion relate the events of a far earlier timethan those of The Lord of the Rings; it is also, in ah the essentials of itsconception, far the earlier work. Indeed, although it was not then called TheSilmarillion, it was already in being half a century ago; and in batterednotebooks extending back to 1917 can still be read the earliest versions, oftenhastily pencilled, of the central stories of the mythology. But it was neverpublished (though some indication of its content could be gleaned from The Lordof the Rings), and throughout my father’s long life he never abandoned it, norceased even in his last years to work on it. In ah that time The Silmarillion,considered simply as a large narrative structure, underwent relatively littleradical change; it became long ago a fixed tradition, and background to laterwritings. But it was far indeed from being a fixed text, and did not remainunchanged even in certain fundamental ideas concerning the nature of the worldit portrays; while the same legends came to be retold in longer and shorter forms,and in different styles. As the years passed the changes and variants, both indetail and in larger perspectives, became so complex, so pervasive, and so many¬layered that a final and definitive version seemed unattainable. Moreover the oldlegends (‘old’ now not only in their derivation from the remote First Age, butalso in terms of my father’s life) became the vehicle and depository of hisprofoundest reflections. In his later writing mythology and poetry sank downbehind his theological and philosophical preoccupations: from which aroseincompatibilities of tone.
On my father’s death it fell to me to try to bring the work into publishableform. It became clear to me that to attempt to present, within the covers of asingle book, the diversity of the materials - to show The Silmarillion as in truth acontinuing and evolving creation extending over more than half a century -would in fact lead only to confusion and the submerging of what is essential. I
set myself therefore to work out a single text, selecting and arranging in such away as seemed to me to produce the most coherent and internally self-consistentnarrative. In this work the concluding chapters (from the death of TurinTurambar) introduced peculiar difficulties, in that they had remained unchangedfor many years, and were in some respects in serious disharmony with moredeveloped conceptions in other parts of the book.
A complete consistency (either within the compass of The Silmarillion itselfor between The Silmarillion and other published writings of my father’s) is notto be looked for, and could only be achieved, if at all, at heavy and needless cost.Moreover, my father come to conceive The Silmarillion as a compilation, acompendious narrative, made long afterwards from sources of great diversity(poems, and annals, and oral tales) that had survived in agelong tradition; andthis conception has indeed its parallel in the actual history of the book, for agreat deal of earlier prose and poetry does underlie it, and it is to some extent acompendium in fact and not only in theory. To this may be ascribed the varyingspeed of the narrative and fullness of detail in different parts, the contrast (forexample) of the precise recollections of place and motive in the legend of TurinTurambar beside the high and remote account of the end of the First Age, whenThangorodrim was broken and Morgoth overthrown; and also some differencesof tone and portrayal, some obscurities, and, here and there, some lack ofcohesion. In the case of the Valaquenta, for instance, we have to assume thatwhile it contains much that must go back to the earliest days of the Eldar inValinor, it was remodelled in later times; and thus explain its continual shiftingof tense and viewpoint, so that the divine powers seem now present and active inthe world, now remote, a vanished order known only to memory.
The book, though entitled as it must be The Silmarillion, contains not only theQuenta Silmarillion, or Silmarillion proper, but also four other short works. TheAinulindale and Valaquenta, which are given at the beginning, are indeed closelyassociated with The Silmarillion; but the Akallabeth and Of the Rings of Power,which appear at the end, are (it must be emphasised) wholly separate andindependent. They are included according to my father’s explicit intention, andby their inclusion the entire history is set forth from the Music of the Ainur inwhich the world began to the passing of the Ringbearers from the Havens ofMithlond at the end of the Third Age.
The number of names that occur in the book is very large, and I have provideda full index; but the number of persons (Elves and Men) who play an importantpart in the narrative of the First Age is very much smaller, and all of these willbe found in the genealogical tables. In addition I have provided a table settingout the rather complex naming of the different Elvish peoples; a note on the
pronunciation of Elvish names, and a list of some of the chief elements found inthese names; and a map. It may be noted that the great mountain range in theeast, Ered Luin or Ered Lindon, the Blue Mountains, appears in the extreme westof the map in The Lord of the Rings. In the body of the book there is a smallermap: the intention of this is to make clear at a glance where lay the kingdoms ofthe Elves after the return of the Noldor to Middle-earth. I have not burdened thebook further with any sort of commentary or annotation.
In the difficult and doubtful task of preparing the text of the book I was verygreatly assisted by Guy Kay, who worked with me in 1974-1975.
Christopher Tolkien1977
PRFFACF TO THF. SECOND F.DTTTON
Probably towards the end of 1951, when The Lord of the Rings was completedbut difficulties lay in the way of its publication, my father wrote a very longletter to his friend Milton Waldman, at that time an editor at the publishing houseof Collins. The context and occasion of this letter lay in the painful differencesthat arose over my father’s insistence that The Silmarillion and The Lord of theRings should be published in ‘conjunction or in connexion’ ‘as one long Saga ofthe Jewels and the Rings’. There is however no need to enter into this matterhere. The letter that he wrote with a view to justifying and explaining hiscontention emerged as a brilliant exposition of his conception of the earlier Ages(the latter part of the letter, as he himself said, was no more than ‘a long and yetbald resume’ of the narrative of The Lord of the Rings), and it is for this reasonthat I believe that it merits inclusion within the covers of The Silmarillion, as isdone in this edition.
The original letter is lost, but Milton Waldman had a typescript made of it, andsent a copy to my father: it was from this copy that the letter was printed (inpart) in The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien (1981), no.131. The text given here is thatin Letters, pp. 143-157, with minor corrections and the omission of some of thefootnotes. There were many errors in the typescript, especially in names; thesewere very largely corrected by my father, but he did not observe the sentence onp.xviii: ‘There was nothing wrong essentially in their lingering against counsel,still sadly with the mortal lands of their old heroic deeds.’ Here the typistcertainly omitted words in the manuscript, and perhaps misread those given aswell.
I have removed a number of errors in the text and index which until now haveescaped correction in the hardback printings (only) of The Silmarillion. Chiefamong these are those that concern the numbering in sequence of certain of therulers of Numenor (for these errors and an explanation of how they arose seeUnfinished Tales (1980), p.226, note 11, and The Peoples of Middle-earth(1996), p.154, §31).
Christopher Tolkien
1999
FROM A T.F.TTF.R BY T.R.R. TOT.KTF.N TO
MIT TON WAT,DM AN. 1951
My dear Milton,
You asked for a brief sketch of my stuff that is connected with my imaginaryworld. It is difficult to say anything without saying too much: the attempt to saya few words opens a floodgate of excitement, the egoist and artist at once desiresto say how the stuff has grown, what it is like, and what (he thinks) he means oris trying to represent by it all. I shall inflict some of this on you; but I willappend a mere resume of its contents: which is (may be) all that you want or willhave use or time for.
In order of time, growth and composition, this stuff began with me - though Ido not suppose that that is of much interest to anyone but myself. I mean, I donot remember a time when I was not building it. Many children make up, orbegin to make up, imaginary languages. I have been at it since I could write. ButI have never stopped, and of course, as a professional philologist (especiallyinterested in linguistic aesthetics), I have changed in taste, improved in theory,and probably in craft. Behind my stories is now a nexus of languages (mostlyonly structurally sketched). But to those creatures which in English I callmisleadingly Elves are assigned two related languages more nearly completed,whose history is written, and whose forms (representing two different sides ofmy own linguistic taste) are deduced scientifically from a common origin. Out ofthese languages are made nearly all the names that appear in my legends. Thisgives a certain character (a cohesion, a consistency of linguistic style, and anillusion of historicity) to the nomenclature, or so I believe, that is markedlylacking in other comparable things. Not ah will feel this as important as I do,since I am cursed by acute sensibility in such matters.
But an equally basic passion of mine ab initio was for myth (not allegory!)and for fairy-story, and above ah for heroic legend on the brink of fairy-tale andhistory, of which there is far too little in the world (accessible to me) for myappetite. I was an undergraduate before thought and experience revealed to methat these were not divergent interests - opposite poles of science and romance -but integrally related. I am not ‘learned’* in the matters of myth and fairy-story,however, for in such things (as far as known to me) I have always been seeking
material, things of a certain tone and air, and not simple knowledge. Also - andhere I hope I shall not sound absurd - I was from early days grieved by thepoverty of my own beloved country: it had no stories of its own (bound up withits tongue and soil), not of the quality that I sought, and found (as an ingredient)in legends of other lands. There was Greek, and Celtic, and Romance, Germanic,Scandinavian, and Finnish (which greatly affected me); but nothing English,save impoverished chap-book stuff. Of course there was and is all the Arthurianworld, but powerful as it is, it is imperfectly naturalized, associated with the soilof Britain but not with English; and does not replace what I felt to be missing.For one thing its 'faerie’ is too lavish, and fantastical, incoherent and repetitive.For another and more important thing: it is involved in, and explicitly containsthe Christian religion.
For reasons which I will not elaborate, that seems to me fatal. Myth and fairy-story must, as all art, reflect and contain in solution elements of moral andreligious truth (or error), but not explicit, not in the known form of the primary‘real’ world. (I am speaking, of course, of our present situation, not of ancientpagan, pre-Christian days. And I will not repeat what I tried to say in my essay,which you read.)
Do not laugh! But once upon a time (my crest has long since fallen) I had amind to make a body of more or less connected legend, ranging from the largeand cosmogonic, to the level of romantic fairy-story - the larger founded on thelesser in contact with the earth, the lesser drawing splendour from the vastbackcloths - which I could dedicate simply to: to England; to my country. Itshould possess the tone and quality that I desired, somewhat cool and clear, beredolent of our ‘air’ (the clime and soil of the North West, meaning Britain andthe hither parts of Europe: not Italy or the Aegean, still less the East), and, whilepossessing (if I could achieve it) the fair elusive beauty that some call Celtic(though it is rarely found in genuine ancient Celtic things), it should be ‘high’,purged of the gross, and fit for the more adult mind of a land long now steepedin poetry. I would draw some of the great tales in fullness, and leave many onlyplaced in the scheme, and sketched. The cycles should be linked to a majesticwhole, and yet leave scope for other minds and hands, wielding paint and musicand drama. Absurd.
Of course, such an overweening purpose did not develop all at once. The merestories were the thing. They arose in my mind as ‘given’ things, and as theycame, separately, so too the links grew. An absorbing, though continuallyinterrupted labour (especially since, even apart from the necessities of life, themind would wing to the other pole and spend itself on the linguistics): yetalways I had the sense of recording what was already ‘there’, somewhere: not of
‘inventing’.
Of course, I made up and even wrote lots of other things (especially for mychildren). Some escaped from the grasp of this branching acquisitive theme,being ultimately and radically unrelated: Leaf by Niggle and Farmer Giles, forinstance, the only two that have been printed. The Hobbit, which has much moreessential life in it, was quite independently conceived: I did not know as I beganit that it belonged. But it proved to be the discovery of the completion of thewhole, its mode of descent to earth, and merging into ‘history’. As the highLegends of the beginnings are supposed to look at things through Elvish minds,so the middle tale of the Hobbit takes a virtually human point of view - and thelast tale blends them.
I dislike Allegory - the conscious and intentional allegory - yet any attempt toexplain the purport of myth or fairytale must use allegorical language. (And, ofcourse, the more ‘life’ a story has the more readily will it be susceptible ofallegorical interpretations: while the better a deliberate allegory is made the morenearly will it be acceptable just as a story.) Anyway all this stuff* is mainlyconcerned with Fall, Mortality, and the Machine. With Fall inevitably, and thatmotive occurs in several modes. With Mortality, especially as it affects art andthe creative (or as I should say, sub-creative) desire which seems to have nobiological function, and to be apart from the satisfactions of plain ordinarybiological life, with which, in our world, it is indeed usually at strife. This desireis at once wedded to a passionate love of the real primary world, and hence filledwith the sense of mortality, and yet unsatisfied by it. It has various opportunitiesof ‘Fall’. It may become possessive, clinging to the things made as its own, thesub-creator wishes to be the Lord and God of his private creation. He will rebelagainst the laws of the Creator - especially against mortality. Both of these(alone or together) will lead to the desire for Power, for making the will morequickly effective, - and so to the Machine (or Magic). By the last I intend all useof external plans or devices (apparatus) instead of developments of the inherentinner powers or talents - or even the use of these talents with the corruptedmotive of dominating: bulldozing the real world, or coercing other wills. TheMachine is our more obvious modern form though more closely related to Magicthan is usually recognised.
I have not used ‘magic’ consistently, and indeed the Elven-queen Galadriel isobliged to remonstrate with the Hobbits on their confused use of the word bothfor the devices and operations of the Enemy, and for those of the Elves. I havenot, because there is not a word for the latter (since all human stories havesuffered the same confusion). But the Elves are there (in my tales) todemonstrate the difference. Their ‘magic’ is Art, delivered from many of its
human limitations: more effortless, more quick, more complete (product, andvision in unflawed correspondence). And its object is Art not Power, sub¬creation not domination and tyrannous reforming of Creation. The ‘Elves’ are‘immortal’, at least as far as this world goes: and hence are concerned ratherwith the griefs and burdens of deathlessness in time and change, than with death.The Enemy in successive forms is always ‘naturally’ concerned with sheerDomination, and so the Lord of magic and machines; but the problem: that thisfrightful evil can and does arise from an apparently good root, the desire tobenefit the world and others* - speedily and according to the benefactors ownplans - is a recurrent motive.
The cycles begin with a cosmogonical myth: the Music of the Amur. God andthe Valar (or powers: Englished as gods) are revealed. These latter are as weshould say angelic powers, whose function is to exercise delegated authority intheir spheres (of rule and government, not creation, making or re-making). Theyare ‘divine’, that is, were originally ‘outside’ and existed ‘before’ the making ofthe world. Their power and wisdom is derived from their Knowledge of thecosmogonical drama, which they perceived first as a drama (that is as in afashion we perceive a story composed by someone else), and later as a ‘reality’.On the side of mere narrative device, this is, of course, meant to provide beingsof the same order of beauty, power, and majesty as the ‘gods’ of highermythology, which can yet be accepted - well, shall we say baldly, by a mind thatbelieves in the Blessed Trinity.
It moves then swiftly to the History of the Elves, or the Silmarillion proper; tothe world as we perceive it, but of course transfigured in a still half-mythicalmode: that is it deals with rational incarnate creatures of more or lesscomparable stature with our own. The Knowledge of the Creation Drama wasincomplete: incomplete in each individual ‘god’, and incomplete if all theknowledge of the pantheon were pooled. For (partly to redress the evil of therebel Melkor, partly for the completion of all in an ultimate finesse of detail) theCreator had not revealed all. The making, and nature, of the Children of God,were the two chief secrets. All that the gods knew was that they would come, atappointed times. The Children of God are thus primevally related and akin, andprimevally different. Since also they are something wholly ‘other’ to the gods, inthe making of which the gods played no part, they are the object of the specialdesire and love of the gods. These are the First-born, the Elves; and theFollowers Men. The doom of the Elves is to be immortal, to love the beauty ofthe world, to bring it to full flower with their gifts of delicacy and perfection, to
last while it lasts, never leaving it even when ‘slain’, but returning - and yet,when the Followers come, to teach them, and make way for them, to ‘fade’ asthe Followers grow and absorb the life from which both proceed. The Doom (orthe Gift) of Men is mortality, freedom from the circles of the world. Since thepoint of view of the whole cycle is the Elvish, mortality is not explainedmythically: it is a mystery of God of which no more is known than that ‘whatGod has purposed for Men is hidden’: a grief and an envy to the immortal Elves.
As I say, the legendary Silmarillion is peculiar, and differs from all similarthings that I know in not being anthropocentric. Its centre of view and interest isnot Men but ‘Elves’. Men come in inevitably: after all the author is a man, and ifhe has an audience they will be Men and Men must come in to our tales, as such,and not merely transfigured or partially represented as Elves, Dwarfs, Hobbits,etc. But they remain peripheral - late comers, and however growingly important,not principals.
In the cosmogony there is a fall: a fall of Angels we should say. Though quitedifferent in form, of course, to that of Christian myth. These tales are ‘new’, theyare not directly derived from other myths and legends, but they must inevitablycontain a large measure of ancient wide-spread motives or elements. After all, Ibelieve that legends and myths are largely made of ‘truth’, and indeed presentaspects of it that can only be received in this mode; and long ago certain truthsand modes of this kind were discovered and must always reappear. There cannotbe any ‘story’ without a fall - all stories are ultimately about the fall - at leastnot for human minds as we know them and have them.
So, proceeding, the Elves have a fall, before their ‘history’ can become storial.(The first fall of Man, for reasons explained, nowhere appears - Men do notcome on the stage until all that is long past, and there is only a rumour that for awhile they fell under the domination of the Enemy and that some repented.) Themain body of the tale, the Silmarillion proper, is about the fall of the most giftedkindred of the Elves, their exile from Valinor (a kind of Paradise, the home ofthe Gods) in the furthest West, their re-entry into Middle-earth, the land of theirbirth but long under the rule of the Enemy, and their strife with him, the powerof Evil still visibly incarnate. It receives its name because the events are allthreaded upon the fate and significance of the Silmarilli (‘radiance of pure light’)or Primeval Jewels. By the making of gems the sub-creative function of theElves is chiefly symbolized, but the Silmarilli were more than just beautifulthings as such. There was Light. There was the Light of Valinor made visible inthe Two Trees of Silver and Gold.* These were slain by the Enemy out ofmalice, and Valinor was darkened, though from them, ere they died utterly, werederived the lights of Sun and Moon. (A marked difference here between these
legends and most others is that the Sun is not a divine symbol, but a second-bestthing, and the ‘light of the Sun’ (the world under the sun) become terms for afallen world, and a dislocated imperfect vision).
But the chief artificer of the Elves (Feanor) had imprisoned the Light ofValinor in the three supreme jewels, the Silmarilli, before the Trees were sulliedor slain. This Light thus lived thereafter only in these gems. The fall of the Elvescomes about through the possessive attitude of Feanor and his seven sons tothese gems. They are captured by the Enemy, set in his Iron Crown, and guardedin his impenetrable stronghold. The sons of Feanor take a terrible andblasphemous oath of enmity and vengeance against all or any, even of the gods,who dares to claim any part or right in the Silmarilli. They pervert the greaterpart of their kindred, who rebel against the gods, and depart from paradise, andgo to make hopeless war upon the Enemy. The first fruit of their fall is war inParadise, the slaying of Elves by Elves, and this and their evil oath dogs all theirlater heroism, generating treacheries and undoing all victories. The Silmarillionis the history of the War of the Exiled Elves against the Enemy, which all takesplace in the North-west of the world (Middle-earth). Several tales of victory andtragedy are caught up in it; but it ends with catastrophe, and the passing of theAncient World, the world of the long First Age. The jewels are recovered (by thefinal intervention of the gods) only to be lost for ever to the Elves, one in the sea,one in the deeps of earth, and one as a star of heaven. This legendarium endswith a vision of the end of the world, its breaking and remaking, and therecovery of the Silmarilli and the ‘light before the Sun’ - after a final battlewhich owes, I suppose, more to the Norse vision of Ragnarok than to anythingelse, though it is not much like it.
As the stories become less mythical, and more like stories and romances, Menare interwoven. For the most part these are ‘good Men’ - families and theirchiefs who rejecting the service of Evil, and hearing rumours of the Gods of theWest and the High Elves, flee westward and come into contact with the ExiledElves in the midst of their war. The Men who appear are mainly those of theThree Houses of the Fathers of Men, whose chieftains become allies of theElflords. The contact of Men and Elves already fore-shadows the history of thelater Ages, and a recurrent theme is the idea that in Men (as they now are) thereis a strand of ‘blood’ and inheritance, derived from the Elves, and that the art andpoetry of Men is largely dependent on it, or modified by it.* There are thus twomarriages of mortal and elf - both later coalescing in the kindred of Earendil,represented by Elrond the Half-elven who appears in all the stories, even TheHobbit. The chief of the stories of The Silmarillion, and the one most fullytreated is the Story of Beren and Luthien the Elfmaiden. Here we meet, among
other things, the first example of the motive (to become dominant in Hobbits)that the great policies of world history, ‘the wheels of the world’, are oftenturned not by the Lords and Governors, even gods, but by the seeminglyunknown and weak - owing to the secret life in creation, and the partunknowable to all wisdom but One, that resides in the intrusions of the Childrenof God into the Drama. It is Beren the outlawed mortal who succeeds (with thehelp of Luthien, a mere maiden even if an elf of royalty) where all the armiesand warriors have failed: he penetrates the stronghold of the Enemy and wrestsone of the Silmarilli from the Iron Crown. Thus he wins the hand of Luthien andthe first marriage of mortal and immortal is achieved.
As such the story is (I think a beautiful and powerful) heroic-fairy-romance,receivable in itself with only a very general vague knowledge of the background.But it is also a fundamental link in the cycle, deprived of its full significance outof its place therein. For the capture of the Silmaril, a supreme victory, leads todisaster. The oath of the sons of Feanor becomes operative, and lust for theSilmaril brings all the kingdoms of the Elves to ruin.
There are other stories almost equally full in treatment, and equallyindependent and yet linked to the general history. There is the Children ofHurin,the tragic tale of Turin Turambar and his sister Niniel - of which Turin is thehero: a figure that might be said (by people who like that sort of thing, though itis not very useful) to be derived from elements in Sigurd the Volsung, Oedipus,and the Finnish Kullervo. There is the Fall of Gondolin : the chief Elvishstronghold. And the tale, or tales, of Earendil the Wanderer. He is important asthe person who brings the Silmarillion to its end, and as providing in hisoffspring the main links to and persons in the tales of later Ages. His function, asa representative of both Kindreds, Elves and Men, is to find a sea-passage backto the Land of the Gods, and as ambassador persuade them to take thought againfor the Exiles, to pity them, and rescue them from the Enemy. His wife Elwingdescends from Luthien and still possesses the Silmaril. But the curse still works,and EarendiTs home is destroyed by the sons of Feanor. But this provides thesolution: Elwing casting herself into the Sea to save the Jewel comes to Earendil,and with the power of the great Gem they pass at last to Valinor, and accomplishtheir errand - at the cost of never being allowed to return or dwell again withElves or Men. The gods then move again, and great power comes out of theWest, and the Stronghold of the Enemy is destroyed; and he himself [is] thrustout of the World into the Void, never to reappear there in incarnate form again.The remaining two Silmarils are regained from the Iron Crown - only to be lost.The last two sons of Feanor, compelled by their oath, steal them, and aredestroyed by them, casting themselves into the sea, and the pits of the earth. The
ship of Earendil adorned with the last Silmaril is set in heaven as the brighteststar. So ends The Silmarillion and the tales of the First Age.
The next cycle deals (or would deal) with the Second Age. But it is on Earth adark age, and not very much of its history is (or need be) told. In the great battlesagainst the First Enemy the lands were broken and ruined, and the West ofMiddle-earth became desolate. We learn that the Exiled Elves were, if notcommanded, at least sternly counselled to return into the West, and there be atpeace. They were not to dwell permanently in Valinor again, but in the LonelyIsle of Eressea within sight of the Blessed Realm. The Men of the Three Houseswere rewarded for their valour and faithful alliance, by being allowed to dwell‘westernmost of all mortals’, in the great ‘Atlantis’ isle of Numenore. The doomor gift of God, of mortality, the gods of course cannot abrogate, but theNumenoreans have a great span of life. They set sail and leave Middle-earth, andestablish a great kingdom of mariners just within furthest sight of Eressea (butnot of Valinor). Most of the High Elves depart also back into the West. Not all.Some men akin to the Numenoreans remain in the land not far from the shores ofthe Sea. Some of the Exiles will not return, or delay their return (for the waywest is ever open to the immortals and in the Grey Havens ships are ever readyto sail away for ever). Also the Ores (goblins) and other monsters bred by theFirst Enemy are not wholly destroyed. And there is Sauron. In the Silmarillionand Tales of the First Age Sauron was a being of Valinor perverted to the serviceof the Enemy and becoming his chief captain and servant. He repents in fearwhen the First Enemy is utterly defeated, but in the end does not do as wascommanded, return to the judgement of the gods. He lingers in Middle-earth.Very slowly, beginning with fair motives: the reorganising and rehabilitation ofthe ruin of Middle-earth, ‘neglected by the gods’, he becomes a re-incarnation ofEvil, and a thing lusting for Complete Power - and so consumed ever morefiercely with hate (especially of gods and Elves). All through the twilight of theSecond Age the Shadow is growing in the East of Middle-earth, spreading itssway more and more over Men - who multiply as the Elves begin to fade. Thethree main themes are thus The Delaying Elves that lingered in Middle-earth;Sauron’s growth to a new Dark Lord, master and god of Men; and Numenor-Atlantis. They are dealt with annalistically, and in two Tales or Accounts, TheRings of Power and the Downfall of Numenor. Both are the essential backgroundto The Hobbit and its sequel.
In the first we see a sort of second fall or at least ‘error’ of the Elves. Therewas nothing wrong essentially in their lingering against counsel, still sadly with*
the mortal lands of their old heroic deeds. But they wanted to have their cakewithout eating it. They wanted the peace and bliss and perfect memory of TheWest’, and yet to remain on the ordinary earth where their prestige as the highestpeople, above wild Elves, dwarves, and Men, was greater than at the bottom ofthe hierarchy of Valinor. They thus became obsessed with ‘fading’, the mode inwhich the changes of time (the law of the world under the sun) was perceived bythem. They became sad, and their art (shall we say) antiquarian, and their effortsall really a kind of embalming - even though they also retained the old motive oftheir kind, the adornment of earth, and the healing of its hurts. We hear of alingering kingdom, in the extreme North-west more or less in what was left inthe old lands of The Silmarillion, under Gilgalad; and of other settlements, suchas Imladris (Rivendell) near Elrond; and a great one at Eregion at the Westernfeet of the Misty Mountains, adjacent to the Mines of Moria, the major realm ofthe Dwarves in the Second Age. There arose a friendship between the usuallyhostile folk (of Elves and Dwarves) for the first and only time, and smithcraftreached its highest development. But many of the Elves listened to Sauron. Hewas still fair in that early time, and his motives and those of the Elves seemed togo partly together: the healing of the desolate lands. Sauron found their weakpoint in suggesting that, helping one another, they could make Western Middle-earth as beautiful as Valinor. It was really a veiled attack on the gods, anincitement to try and make a separate independent paradise. Gilgalad repulsed allsuch overtures, as also did Elrond. But at Eregion great work began - and theElves came their nearest to falling to ‘magic’ and machinery. With the aid ofSauron’s lore they made Rings of Power (‘power’ is an ominous and sinisterword in all these tales, except as applied to the gods).
The chief power (of all the rings alike) was the prevention or slowing of decay(i.e. ‘change’ viewed as a regrettable thing), the preservation of what is desiredor loved, or its semblance - this is more or less an Elvish motive. But also theyenhanced the natural powers of a possessor - thus approaching ‘magic’, a motiveeasily corruptible into evil, a lust for domination. And finally they had otherpowers, more directly derived from Sauron (‘the Necromancer’: so he is calledas he casts a fleeting shadow and presage on the pages of The Hobbit ): such asrendering invisible the material body, and making things of the invisible worldvisible.
The Elves of Eregion made Three supremely beautiful and powerful rings,almost solely of their own imagination, and directed to the preservation ofbeauty: they did not confer invisibility. But secretly in the subterranean Fire, inhis own Black Land, Sauron made One Ring, the Ruling Ring that contained thepowers of all the others, and controlled them, so that its wearer could see the
thoughts of all those that used the lesser rings, could govern all that they did, andin the end could utterly enslave them. He reckoned, however, without thewisdom and subtle perceptions of the Elves. The moment he assumed the One,they were aware of it, and of his secret purpose, and were afraid. They hid theThree Rings, so that not even Sauron ever discovered where they were and theyremained unsullied. The others they tried to destroy.
In the resulting war between Sauron and the Elves Middle-earth, especially inthe west, was further ruined. Eregion was captured and destroyed, and Sauronseized many Rings of Power. These he gave, for their ultimate corruption andenslavement, to those who would accept them (out of ambition or greed). Hencethe ‘ancient rhyme’ that appears as the leit-motif of The Lord of the Rings,
Three Rings for the Elven-Kings under the sky,Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone,Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die,
One for the Dark Lord on his dark throneIn the Land of Mordor where the shadows he.
Sauron became thus almost supreme in Middle-earth. The Elves held out insecret places (not yet revealed). The last Elf-Kingdom of Gilgalad is maintainedprecariously on the extreme west-shores, where are the havens of the Ships.Elrond the Half-elven, son of Earendil, maintains a kind of enchanted sanctuaryat Imladris (in English Rivendell) on the extreme eastern margin of the westernlands.* But Sauron dominates all the multiplying hordes of Men that have hadno contact with the Elves and so indirectly with the true and unfallen Valar andgods. He rules a growing empire from the great dark tower of Barad-dur inMordor, near to the Mountain of Fire, wielding the One Ring.
But to achieve this he had been obliged to let a great part of his own inherentpower (a frequent and very significant motive in myth and fairy-story) pass intothe One Ring. While he wore it, his power on earth was actually enhanced. Buteven if he did not wear it, that power existed and was in ‘rapport’ with himself:he was not ‘diminished’. Unless some other seized it and became possessed of it.If that happened, the new possessor could (if sufficiently strong and heroic bynature) challenge Sauron, become master of all that he had learned or done sincethe making of the One Ring, and so overthrow him and usurp his place. This wasthe essential weakness he had introduced into his situation in his effort (largelyunsuccessful) to enslave the Elves, and in his desire to establish a control over
the minds and wills of his servants. There was another weakness: if the OneRing was actually unmade, annihilated, then its power would be dissolved,Sauron’s own being would be diminished to vanishing point, and he would bereduced to a shadow, a mere memory of malicious will. But that he nevercontemplated nor feared. The Ring was unbreakable by any smithcraft less thanhis own. It was indissoluble in any fire, save the undying subterranean fire whereit was made - and that was unapproachable, in Mordor. Also so great was theRing’s power of lust, that anyone who used it became mastered by it; it wasbeyond the strength of any will (even his own) to injure it, cast it away, orneglect it. So he thought. It was in any case on his finger.
Thus, as the Second Age draws on, we have a great Kingdom and eviltheocracy (for Sauron is also the god of his slaves) growing up in Middle-earth.In the West - actually the North-West is the only part clearly envisaged in thesetales - lie the precarious refuges of the Elves, while Men in those parts remainmore or less uncorrupted if ignorant. The better and nobler sort of Men are infact the kin of those that had departed to Numenor, but remain in a simple‘Homeric’ state of patriarchal and tribal life.
Meanwhile Numenor has grown in wealth, wisdom, and glory, under its linesof great kings of long life, directly descended from Elros, Earendil’s son, brotherof Elrond. The Downfall of Numenor, the Second Fall of Man (or Manrehabilitated but still mortal), brings on the catastrophic end, not only of theSecond Age, but of the Old World, the primeval world of legend (envisaged asflat and bounded). After which the Third Age began, a Twilight Age, a MediumAevum, the first of the broken and changed world; the last of the lingeringdominion of visible fully incarnate Elves, and the last also in which Evil assumesa single dominant incarnate shape.
The Downfall is partly the result of an inner weakness in Men - consequent, ifyou will, upon the first Fall (unrecorded in these tales), repented but not finallyhealed. Reward on earth is more dangerous for men than punishment! The Fall isachieved by the cunning of Sauron in exploiting this weakness. Its central themeis (inevitably, I think, in a story of Men) a Ban, or Prohibition.
The Numenoreans dwell within far sight of the easternmost ‘immortal’ land,Eressea; and as the only men to speak an Elvish tongue (learned in the days oftheir Alliance) they are in constant communication with their ancient friends andallies, either in the bliss of Eressea, or in the kingdom of Gilgalad on the shoresof Middle-earth. They became thus in appearance, and even in powers of mind,hardly distinguishable from the Elves - but they remained mortal, even thoughrewarded by a triple, or more than a triple, span of years. Their reward is theirundoing - or the means of their temptation. Their long life aids their
achievements in art and wisdom, but breeds a possessive attitude to these things,and desire awakes for more time for their enjoyment. Foreseeing this in part, thegods laid a Ban on the Numenoreans from the beginning: they must never sail toEressea, nor westward out of sight of their own land. In all other directions theycould go as they would. They must not set foot on ‘immortal’ lands, and sobecome enamoured of an immortality (within the world), which was against theirlaw, the special doom or gift of Iluvatar (God), and which their nature could notin fact endure.*
There are three phases in their fall from grace. First acquiescence, obediencethat is free and willing, though without complete understanding. Then for longthey obey unwillingly, murmuring more and more openly. Finally they rebel -and a rift appears between the King’s men and rebels, and the small minority ofpersecuted Faithful.
In the first stage, being men of peace, their courage is devoted to sea-voyages.As descendants of Earendil, they became the supreme mariners, and beingbarred from the West, they sail to the uttermost north, and south, and east.Mostly they come to the west-shores of Middle-earth, where they aid the Elvesand Men against Sauron, and incur his undying hatred. In those days they wouldcome amongst Wild Men as almost divine benefactors, bringing gifts of arts andknowledge, and passing away again - leaving many legends behind of kings andgods out of the sunset.
In the second stage, the days of Pride and Glory and grudging of the Ban, theybegin to seek wealth rather than bliss. The desire to escape death produced a cultof the dead, and they lavished wealth and art on tombs and memorials. They nowmade settlements on the west-shores, but these became rather strongholds and‘factories’ of lords seeking wealth, and the Numenoreans became tax-gathererscarrying off over the sea ever more and more goods in their great ships. TheNumenoreans began the forging of arms and engines.
This phase ended and the last began with the ascent of the throne by thethirteenth! king of the line of Elros, Tar-Calion the Golden, the most powerfuland proud of all kings. When he learned that Sauron had taken the title of Kingof Kings and Lord of the World, he resolved to put down the ‘pretender’. Hegoes in strength and majesty to Middle-earth, and so vast is his armament, and soterrible are the Numenoreans in the day of their glory that Sauron’s servants willnot face them. Sauron humbles himself, does homage to Tar-Calion, and iscarried off to Numenor as hostage and prisoner. But there he swiftly rises by hiscunning and knowledge from servant to chief counsellor of the king, and seducesthe king and most of the lords and people with his lies. He denies the existenceof God, saying that the One is a mere invention of the jealous Valar of the West,
the oracle of their own wishes. The chief of the gods is he that dwells in theVoid, who will conquer in the end, and in the void make endless realms for hisservants. The Ban is only a lying device of fear to restrain the Kings of Menfrom seizing everlasting life and rivalling the Valar.
A new religion, and worship of the Dark, with its temple under Sauron arises.The Faithful are persecuted and sacrificed. The Numenoreans carry their evilalso to Middle-earth and there become cruel and wicked lords of necromancy,slaying and tormenting men; and the old legends are overlaid with dark tales ofhorror. This does not happen, however, in the North West; for thither, because ofthe Elves, only the Faithful who remain Elf-friends will come. The chief havenof the good Numenoreans is near the mouth of the great river Anduin. Thencethe still beneficent influence of Numenor spreads up the River and along thecoasts as far north as the realm of Gilgalad, as a Common Speech grows up.
But at last Sauron’s plot comes to fulfilment, Tar-Calion feels old age anddeath approaching, and he listens to the last prompting of Sauron, and buildingthe greatest of all armadas, he sets sail into the West, breaking the Ban, andgoing up with war to wrest from the gods ‘everlasting life within the circles ofthe world’. Faced by this rebellion, of appalling folly and blasphemy, and alsoreal peril (since the Numenoreans directed by Sauron could have wrought ruin inValinor itself ) the Valar lay down their delegated power and appeal to God, andreceive the power and permission to deal with the situation; the old world isbroken and changed. A chasm is opened in the sea and Tar-Calion and hisarmada is engulfed. Numenor itself on the edge of the rift topples and vanishesfor ever with all its glory in the abyss. Thereafter there is no visible dwelling ofthe divine or immortal on earth. Valinor (or Paradise) and even Eressea areremoved, remaining only in the memory of the earth. Men may sail now West, ifthey will, as far as they may, and come no nearer to Valinor or the BlessedRealm, but return only into the east and so back again; for the world is round,and finite, and a circle inescapable - save by death. Only the ‘immortals’, thelingering Elves, may still if they will, wearying of the circle of the world, takeship and find the ‘straight way’, and come to the ancient or True West, and be atpeace.
So the end of the Second Age draws on in a major catastrophe; but it is not yetquite concluded. From the cataclysm there are survivors: Elendil the Fair, chiefof the Faithful (his name means Elf-friend ), and his sons Isildur and Anarion.Elendil, a Noachian figure, who has held off from the rebellion, and kept shipsmanned and furnished off the east coast of Numenor, flees before theoverwhelming storm of the wrath of the West, and is borne high upon thetowering waves that bring ruin to the west of the Middle-earth. He and his folk
are cast away as exiles upon the shores. There they establish the Numenoreankingdoms of Arnor in the north close to the realm of Gilgalad, and Gondor aboutthe mouths of Anduin further south. Sauron, being an immortal, hardly escapesthe ruin of Numenor and returns to Mordor, where after a while he is strongenough to challenge the exiles of Numenor.
The Second Age ends with the Last Alliance (of Elves and Men), and the greatsiege of Mordor. It ends with the overthrow of Sauron and destruction of thesecond visible incarnation of evil. But at a cost, and with one disastrous mistake.Gilgalad and Elendil are slain in the act of slaying Sauron. Isildur, Elendil’s son,cuts the ring from Sauron’s hand, and his power departs, and his spirit flees intothe shadows. But the evil begins to work. Isildur claims the Ring as his own, as‘the Weregild of his father’, and refuses to cast it into the Fire nearby. Hemarches away, but is drowned in the Great River, and the Ring is lost, passingout of all knowledge. But it is not unmade, and the Dark Tower built with its aidstill stands, empty but not destroyed. So ends the Second Age with the coming ofthe Numenorean realms and the passing of the last kingship of the High Elves.
AINULINDALE
ATNUT.INDAT.F,
The Music of the Ainur
There was Eru, the One, who in Arda is called Iluvatar; and he made first theAinur, the Holy Ones, that were the offspring of his thought, and they were withhim before aught else was made. And he spoke to them, propounding to themthemes of music; and they sang before him, and he was glad. But for a longwhile they sang only each alone, or but few together, while the rest hearkened;for each comprehended only that part of the mind of Iluvatar from which hecame, and in the understanding of their brethren they grew but slowly. Yet everas they listened they came to deeper understanding, and increased in unison andharmony.
And it came to pass that Iluvatar called together all the Ainur and declared tothem a mighty theme, unfolding to them things greater and more wonderful thanhe had yet revealed; and the glory of its beginning and the splendour of its endamazed the Ainur, so that they bowed before Iluvatar and were silent.
Then Iluvatar said to them: ‘Of the theme that I have declared to you, I willnow that ye make in harmony together a Great Music. And since I have kindledyou with the Flame Imperishable, ye shall show forth your powers in adorningthis theme, each with his own thoughts and devices, if he will. But I will sit andhearken, and be glad that through you great beauty has been wakened into song.’
Then the voices of the Ainur, like unto harps and lutes, and pipes andtrumpets, and viols and organs, and like unto countless choirs singing withwords, began to fashion the theme of Iluvatar to a great music; and a sound aroseof endless interchanging melodies woven in harmony that passed beyond hearinginto the depths and into the heights, and the places of the dwelling of Iluvatarwere filled to overflowing, and the music and the echo of the music went outinto the Void, and it was not void. Never since have the Ainur made any musiclike to this music, though it has been said that a greater still shall be made beforeIluvatar by the choirs of the Ainur and the Children of Iluvatar after the end ofdays. Then the themes of Iluvatar shall be played aright, and take Being in themoment of their utterance, for all shall then understand fully his intent in theirpart, and each shall know the comprehension of each, and Iluvatar shall give totheir thoughts the secret fire, being well pleased.
But now Iluvatar sat and hearkened, and for a great while it seemed good tohim, for in the music there were no flaws. But as the theme progressed, it cameinto the heart of Melkor to interweave matters of his own imagining that werenot in accord with the theme of Iluvatar; for he sought therein to increase thepower and glory of the part assigned to himself. To Melkor among the Ainur hadbeen given the greatest gifts of power and knowledge, and he had a share in allthe gifts of his brethren. He had gone often alone into the void places seeking theImperishable Flame; for desire grew hot within him to bring into Being things ofhis own, and it seemed to him that Iluvatar took no thought for the Void, and hewas impatient of its emptiness. Yet he found not the Fire, for it is with Iluvatar.But being alone he had begun to conceive thoughts of his own unlike those ofhis brethren.
Some of these thoughts he now wove into his music, and straightway discordarose about him, and many that sang nigh him grew despondent, and theirthought was disturbed and their music faltered; but some began to attune theirmusic to his rather than to the thought which they had at first. Then the discordof Melkor spread ever wider, and the melodies which had been heard beforefoundered in a sea of turbulent sound. But Iluvatar sat and hearkened until itseemed that about his throne there was a raging storm, as of dark waters thatmade war one upon another in an endless wrath that would not be assuaged.
Then Iluvatar arose, and the Ainur perceived that he smiled; and he lifted uphis left hand, and a new theme began amid the storm, like and yet unlike to theformer theme, and it gathered power and had new beauty. But the discord ofMelkor rose in uproar and contended with it, and again there was a war of soundmore violent than before, until many of the Ainur were dismayed and sang nolonger, and Melkor had the mastery. Then again Iluvatar arose, and the Ainurperceived that his countenance was stern; and he lifted up his right hand, andbehold! a third theme grew amid the confusion, and it was unlike the others. Forit seemed at first soft and sweet, a mere rippling of gentle sounds in delicatemelodies; but it could not be quenched, and it took to itself power andprofundity. And it seemed at last that there were two musics progressing at onetime before the seat of Iluvatar, and they were utterly at variance. The one wasdeep and wide and beautiful, but slow and blended with an immeasurablesorrow, from which its beauty chiefly came. The other had now achieved a unityof its own; but it was loud, and vain, and endlessly repeated; and it had littleharmony, but rather a clamorous unison as of many trumpets braying upon a fewnotes. And it essayed to drown the other music by the violence of its voice, but it
seemed that its most triumphant notes were taken by the other and woven into itsown solemn pattern.
In the midst of this strife, whereat the halls of Iluvatar shook and a tremor ranout into the silences yet unmoved, Iluvatar arose a third time, and his face wasterrible to behold. Then he raised up both his hands, and in one chord, deeperthan the Abyss, higher than the Firmament, piercing as the light of the eye ofIluvatar, the Music ceased.
Then Iluvatar spoke, and he said: ‘Mighty are the Ainur, and mightiest amongthem is Melkor; but that he may know, and all the Ainur, that I am Iluvatar, thosethings that ye have sung, I will show them forth, that ye may see what ye havedone. And thou, Melkor, shalt see that no theme may be played that hath not itsuttermost source in me, nor can any alter the music in my despite. For he thatattempteth this shall prove but mine instrument in the devising of things morewonderful, which he himself hath not imagined.’
Then the Ainur were afraid, and they did not yet comprehend the words thatwere said to them; and Melkor was filled with shame, of which came secretanger. But Iluvatar arose in splendour, and he went forth from the fair regionsthat he had made for the Ainur; and the Ainur followed him.
But when they were come into the Void, Iluvatar said to them: ‘Behold yourMusic!’ And he showed to them a vision, giving to them sight where before wasonly hearing; and they saw a new World made visible before them, and it wasglobed amid the Void, and it was sustained therein, but was not of it. And as theylooked and wondered this World began to unfold its history, and it seemed tothem that it lived and grew. And when the Ainur had gazed for a while and weresilent, Iluvatar said again: ‘Behold your Music! This is your minstrelsy; and eachof you shall find contained herein, amid the design that I set before you, all thosethings which it may seem that he himself devised or added. And thou, Melkor,wilt discover all the secret thoughts of thy mind, and wilt perceive that they arebut a part of the whole and tributary to its glory.’
And many other things Iluvatar spoke to the Ainur at that time, and because oftheir memory of his words, and the knowledge that each has of the music that hehimself made, the Ainur know much of what was, and is, and is to come, andfew things are unseen by them. Yet some things there are that they cannot see,neither alone nor taking counsel together; for to none but himself has Iluvatarrevealed all that he has in store, and in every age there come forth things that arenew and have no foretelling, for they do not proceed from the past. And so it wasthat as this vision of the World was played before them, the Ainur saw that itcontained things which they had not thought. And they saw with amazement thecoming of the Children of Iluvatar, and the habitation that was prepared for
them; and they perceived that they themselves in the labour of their music hadbeen busy with the preparation of this dwelling, and yet knew not that it had anypurpose beyond its own beauty. For the Children of Iluvatar were conceived byhim alone; and they came with the third theme, and were not in the theme whichIluvatar propounded at the beginning, and none of the Ainur had part in theirmaking. Therefore when they beheld them, the more did they love them, beingthings other than themselves, strange and free, wherein they saw the mind ofIluvatar reflected anew, and learned yet a little more of his wisdom, whichotherwise had been hidden even from the Ainur.
Now the Children of Iluvatar are Elves and Men, the Firstborn and theFollowers. And amid all the splendours of the World, its vast halls and spaces,and its wheeling fires, Iluvatar chose a place for their habitation in the Deeps ofTime and in the midst of the innumerable stars. And this habitation might seem alittle thing to those who consider only the majesty of the Ainur, and not theirterrible sharpness; as who should take the whole field of Arda for the foundationof a pillar and so raise it until the cone of its summit were more bitter than aneedle; or who consider only the immeasurable vastness of the World, which stillthe Ainur are shaping, and not the minute precision to which they shape allthings therein. But when the Ainur had beheld this habitation in a vision and hadseen the Children of Iluvatar arise therein, then many of the most mighty amongthem bent all their thought and their desire towards that place. And of theseMelkor was the chief, even as he was in the beginning the greatest of the Ainurwho took part in the Music. And he feigned, even to himself at first, that hedesired to go thither and order all things for the good of the Children of Iluvatar,controlling the turmoils of the heat and the cold that had come to pass throughhim. But he desired rather to subdue to his will both Elves and Men, envying thegifts with which Iluvatar promised to endow them; and he wished himself tohave subjects and servants, and to be called Lord, and to be a master over otherwills.
But the other Ainur looked upon this habitation set within the vast spaces ofthe World, which the Elves call Arda, the Earth; and their hearts rejoiced in light,and their eyes beholding many colours were filled with gladness; but because ofthe roaring of the sea they felt a great unquiet. And they observed the winds andthe air, and the matters of which Arda was made, of iron and stone and silver andgold and many substances: but of all these water they most greatly praised. Andit is said by the Eldar that in water there lives yet the echo of the Music of theAinur more than in any substance else that is in this Earth; and many of theChildren of Iluvatar hearken still unsated to the voices of the Sea, and yet knownot for what they listen.
Now to water had that Ainu whom the Elves call Ulmo turned his thought,and of all most deeply was he instructed by Iluvatar in music. But of the airs andwinds Manwe most had pondered, who is the noblest of the Ainur. Of the fabricof Earth had Aule thought, to whom Iluvatar had given skill and knowledgescarce less than to Melkor; but the delight and pride of Aule is in the deed ofmaking, and in the thing made, and neither in possession nor in his own mastery;wherefore he gives and hoards not, and is free from care, passing ever on tosome new work.
And Iluvatar spoke to Ulmo, and said: ‘Seest thou not how here in this littlerealm in the Deeps of Time Melkor hath made war upon thy province? He hathbethought him of bitter cold immoderate, and yet hath not destroyed the beautyof thy fountains, nor of thy clear pools. Behold the snow, and the cunning workof frost! Melkor hath devised heats and fire without restraint, and hath not driedup thy desire nor utterly quelled the music of the sea. Behold rather the heightand glory of the clouds, and the everchanging mists; and listen to the fall of rainupon the Earth! And in these clouds thou art drawn nearer to Manwe, thy friend,whom thou lovest.’
Then Ulmo answered: 'Truly, Water is become now fairer than my heartimagined, neither had my secret thought conceived the snowflake, nor in all mymusic was contained the falling of the rain. I will seek Manwe, that he and I maymake melodies for ever to thy delight!’ And Manwe and Ulmo have from thebeginning been allied, and in all things have served most faithfully the purposeof Iluvatar.
But even as Ulmo spoke, and while the Ainur were yet gazing upon thisvision, it was taken away and hidden from their sight; and it seemed to them thatin that moment they perceived a new thing, Darkness, which they had not knownbefore except in thought. But they had become enamoured of the beauty of thevision and engrossed in the unfolding of the World which came there to being,and their minds were filled with it; for the history was incomplete and the circlesof time not full-wrought when the vision was taken away. And some have saidthat the vision ceased ere the fulfilment of the Dominion of Men and the fadingof the Firstborn; wherefore, though the Music is over all, the Valar have not seenas with sight the Later Ages or the ending of the World.
Then there was unrest among the Ainur; but Iluvatar called to them, and said:‘I know the desire of your minds that what ye have seen should verily be, notonly in your thought, but even as ye yourselves are, and yet other. Therefore Isay: Ed! Let these things Be! And I will send forth into the Void the Flame
Imperishable, and it shall be at the heart of the World, and the World shall Be;and those of you that will may go down into it.’ And suddenly the Ainur saw afaroff a light, as it were a cloud with a living heart of flame; and they knew that thiswas no vision only, but that Iluvatar had made a new thing: Ea, the World that Is.
Thus it came to pass that of the Ainur some abode still with Iluvatar beyondthe confines of the World; but others, and among them many of the greatest andmost fair, took the leave of Iluvatar and descended into it. But this conditionIluvatar made, or it is the necessity of their love, that their power shouldthenceforward be contained and bounded in the World, to be within it for ever,until it is complete, so that they are its life and it is theirs. And therefore they arenamed the Valar, the Powers of the World.
But when the Valar entered into Ea they were at first astounded and at a loss,for it was as if naught was yet made which they had seen in vision, and all wasbut on point to begin and yet unshaped, and it was dark. For the Great Music hadbeen but the growth and flowering of thought in the Timeless Halls, and theVision only a foreshowing; but now they had entered in at the beginning ofTime, and the Valar perceived that the World had been but foreshadowed andforesung, and they must achieve it. So began their great labours in wastesunmeasured and unexplored, and in ages uncounted and forgotten, until in theDeeps of Time and in the midst of the vast halls of Ea there came to be that hourand that place where was made the habitation of the Children of Iluvatar. And inthis work the chief part was taken by Manwe and Aule and Ulmo; but Melkortoo was there from the first, and he meddled in all that was done, turning it if hemight to his own desires and purposes; and he kindled great fires. Whentherefore Earth was yet young and full of flame Melkor coveted it, and he said tothe other Valar: ‘This shall be my own kingdom; and I name it unto myself ! 5
But Manwe was the brother of Melkor in the mind of Iluvatar, and he was thechief instrument of the second theme that Iluvatar had raised up against thediscord of Melkor; and he called unto himself many spirits both greater and less,and they came down into the fields of Arda and aided Manwe, lest Melkorshould hinder the fulfilment of their labour for ever, and Earth should wither ereit flowered. And Manwe said unto Melkor: ‘This kingdom thou shalt not take forthine own, wrongfully, for many others have laboured here no less than thou.’And there was strife between Melkor and the other Valar; and for that timeMelkor withdrew and departed to other regions and did there what he would; buthe did not put the desire of the Kingdom of Arda from his heart.
Now the Valar took to themselves shape and hue; and because they weredrawn into the World by love of the Children of Iluvatar, for whom they hoped,they took shape after that manner which they had beheld in the Vision of
Iluvatar, save only in majesty and splendour. Moreover their shape comes oftheir knowledge of the visible World, rather than of the World itself; and theyneed it not, save only as we use raiment, and yet we may be naked and suffer noloss of our being. Therefore the Valar may walk, if they will, unclad, and theneven the Eldar cannot clearly perceive them, though they be present. But whenthey desire to clothe themselves the Valar take upon them forms some as of maleand some as of female; for that difference of temper they had even from theirbeginning, and it is but bodied forth in the choice of each, not made by thechoice, even as with us male and female may be shown by the raiment but is notmade thereby. But the shapes wherein the Great Ones array themselves are not atall times like to the shapes of the kings and queens of the Children of Iluvatar;for at times they may clothe themselves in their own thought, made visible informs of majesty and dread.
And the Valar drew unto them many companions, some less, some well nighas great as themselves, and they laboured together in the ordering of the Earthand the curbing of its tumults. Then Melkor saw what was done, and that theValar walked on Earth as powers visible, clad in the raiment of the World, andwere lovely and glorious to see, and blissful, and that the Earth was becoming asa garden for their delight, for its turmoils were subdued. His envy grew then thegreater within him; and he also took visible form, but because of his mood andthe malice that burned in him that form was dark and terrible. And he descendedupon Arda in power and majesty greater than any other of the Valar, as amountain that wades in the sea and has its head above the clouds and is clad inice and crowned with smoke and fire; and the light of the eyes of Melkor waslike a flame that withers with heat and pierces with a deadly cold.
Thus began the first battle of the Valar with Melkor for the dominion of Arda;and of those tumults the Elves know but little. For what has here been declared iscome from the Valar themselves, with whom the Eldalie spoke in the land ofValinor, and by whom they were instructed; but little would the Valar ever tell ofthe wars before the coming of the Elves. Yet it is told among the Eldar that theValar endeavoured ever, in despite of Melkor, to rule the Earth and to prepare itfor the coming of the Firstborn; and they built lands and Melkor destroyed them;valleys they delved and Melkor raised them up; mountains they carved andMelkor threw them down; seas they hollowed and Melkor spilled them; andnaught might have peace or come to lasting growth, for as surely as the Valarbegan a labour so would Melkor undo it or corrupt it. And yet their labour wasnot all in vain; and though nowhere and in no work was their will and purposewholly fulfilled, and all things were in hue and shape other than the Valar had atfirst intended, slowly nonetheless the Earth was fashioned and made firm. And
thus was the habitation of the Children of Iluvatar established at the last in theDeeps of Time and amidst the innumerable stars.
VALAQUENTA
VAT.AQUF.NTA
Account of the Valar and Maiar according to the lore of the Eldar
In the beginning Eru, the One, who in the Elvish tongue is named Iluvatar, madethe Ainur of his thought; and they made a great Music before him. In this Musicthe World was begun; for Iluvatar made visible the song of the Ainur, and theybeheld it as a light in the darkness. And many among them became enamouredof its beauty, and of its history which they saw beginning and unfolding as in avision. Therefore Iluvatar gave to their vision Being, and set it amid the Void,and the Secret Fire was sent to burn at the heart of the World; and it was calledEa.
Then those of the Ainur who desired it arose and entered into the World at thebeginning of Time; and it was their task to achieve it, and by their labours tofulfil the vision which they had seen. Long they laboured in the regions of Ea,which are vast beyond the thought of Elves and Men, until in the time appointedwas made Arda, the Kingdom of Earth. Then they put on the raiment of Earthand descended into it, and dwelt therein.
Of the Valar
The Great among these spirits the Elves name the Valar, the Powers of Arda, andMen have often called them gods. The Lords of the Valar are seven; and theValier, the Queens of the Valar, are seven also. These were their names in theElvish tongue as it was spoken in Valinor, though they have other names in thespeech of the Elves in Middle-earth, and their names among Men are manifold.The names of the Lords in due order are: Manwe, Ulmo, Aule, Orome, Mandos,Lorien, and Tulkas; and the names of the Queens are: Varda, Yavanna, Nienna,Este, Vaire, Vana, and Nessa. Melkor is counted no longer among the Valar, andhis name is not spoken upon Earth.
Manwe and Melkor were brethren in the thought of Iluvatar. The mightiest ofthose Ainur who came into the World was in his beginning Melkor; but Manwe
is dearest to Iluvatar and understands most clearly his purposes. He wasappointed to be, in the fullness of time, the first of all Kings: lord of the realm ofArda and ruler of all that dwell therein. In Arda his delight is in the winds andthe clouds, and in all the regions of the air, from the heights to the depths, fromthe utmost borders of the Veil of Arda to the breezes that blow in the grass.Sulimo he is surnamed, Lord of the Breath of Arda. All swift birds, strong ofwing, he loves, and they come and go at his bidding.
With Manwe dwells Varda, Lady of the Stars, who knows all the regions ofEa. Too great is her beauty to be declared in the words of Men or of Elves; forthe light of Iluvatar lives still in her face. In light is her power and her joy. Out ofthe deeps of Ea she came to the aid of Manwe; for Melkor she knew from beforethe making of the Music and rejected him, and he hated her, and feared her morethan all others whom Eru made. Manwe and Varda are seldom parted, and theyremain in Valinor. Their halls are above the everlasting snow, upon Oiolosse, theuttermost tower of Taniquetil, tallest of all the mountains upon Earth. WhenManwe there ascends his throne and looks forth, if Varda is beside him, he seesfurther than all other eyes, through mist, and through darkness, and over theleagues of the sea. And if Manwe is with her, Varda hears more clearly than allother ears the sound of voices that cry from east to west, from the hills and thevalleys, and from the dark places that Melkor has made upon Earth. Of all theGreat Ones who dwell in this world the Elves hold Varda most in reverence andlove. Elbereth they name her, and they call upon her name out of the shadows ofMiddle-earth, and uplift it in song at the rising of the stars.
Ulmo is the Lord of Waters. He is alone. He dwells nowhere long, but movesas he will in all the deep waters about the Earth or under the Earth. He is next inmight to Manwe, and before Valinor was made he was closest to him infriendship; but thereafter he went seldom to the councils of the Valar, unlessgreat matters were in debate. For he kept all Arda in thought, and he has no needof any resting-place. Moreover he does not love to walk upon land, and willseldom clothe himself in a body after the manner of his peers. If the Children ofEru beheld him they were filled with a great dread; for the arising of the King ofthe Sea was terrible, as a mounting wave that strides to the land, with dark helmfoam-crested and raiment of mail shimmering from silver down into shadows ofgreen. The trumpets of Manwe are loud, but Ulmo’s voice is deep as the deeps ofthe ocean which he only has seen.
Nonetheless Ulmo loves both Elves and Men, and never abandoned them, noteven when they lay under the wrath of the Valar. At times he will come unseento the shores of Middle-earth, or pass far inland up firths of the sea, and theremake music upon his great horns, the Ulumuri, that are wrought of white shell;
and those to whom that music comes hear it ever after in their hearts, andlonging for the sea never leaves them again. But mostly Ulmo speaks to thosewho dwell in Middle-earth with voices that are heard only as the music of water.For all seas, lakes, rivers, fountains and springs are in his government; so thatthe Elves say that the spirit of Ulmo runs in all the veins of the world. Thus newscomes to Ulmo, even in the deeps, of all the needs and griefs of Arda, whichotherwise would be hidden from Manwe.
Aule has might little less than Ulmo. His lordship is over all the substances ofwhich Arda is made. In the beginning he wrought much in fellowship withManwe and Ulmo; and the fashioning of all lands was his labour. He is a smithand a master of all crafts, and he delights in works of skill, however small, asmuch as in the mighty building of old. His are the gems that lie deep in the Earthand the gold that is fair in the hand, no less than the walls of the mountains andthe basins of the sea. The Noldor learned most of him, and he was ever theirfriend. Melkor was jealous of him, for Aule was most like himself in thought andin powers; and there was long strife between them, in which Melkor ever marredor undid the works of Aule, and Aule grew weary in repairing the tumults anddisorders of Melkor. Both, also, desired to make things of their own that shouldbe new and unthought of by others, and delighted in the praise of their skill. ButAule remained faithful to Eru and submitted all that he did to his will; and he didnot envy the works of others, but sought and gave counsel. Whereas Melkorspent his spirit in envy and hate, until at last he could make nothing save inmockery of the thought of others, and all their works he destroyed if he could.
The spouse of Aule is Yavanna, the Giver of Fruits. She is the lover of allthings that grow in the earth, and all their countless forms she holds in her mind,from the trees like towers in forests long ago to the moss upon stones or thesmall and secret things in the mould. In reverence Yavanna is next to Vardaamong the Queens of the Valar. In the form of a woman she is tall, and robed ingreen; but at times she takes other shapes. Some there are who have seen herstanding like a tree under heaven, crowned with the Sun; and from all itsbranches there spilled a golden dew upon the barren earth, and it grew greenwith corn; but the roots of the tree were in the waters of Ulmo, and the winds ofManwe spoke in its leaves. Kementari, Queen of the Earth, she is surnamed inthe Eldarin tongue.
The Feanturi, masters of spirits, are brethren, and they are called most oftenMandos and Lorien. Yet these are rightly the names of the places of theirdwelling, and their tme names are Namo and Irmo.
Namo the elder dwells in Mandos, which is westward in Valinor. He is thekeeper of the Houses of the Dead, and the summoner of the spirits of the slain.
He forgets nothing; and he knows all things that shall be, save only those that liestill in the freedom of Iluvatar. He is the Doomsman of the Valar; but hepronounces his dooms and his judgements only at the bidding of Manwe. Vairethe Weaver is his spouse, who weaves all things that have ever been in Time intoher storied webs, and the halls of Mandos that ever widen as the ages pass areclothed with them.
Irmo the younger is the master of visions and dreams. In Lorien are hisgardens in the land of the Valar, and they are the fairest of all places in the world,filled with many spirits. Este the gentle, healer of hurts and of weariness, is hisspouse. Grey is her raiment; and rest is her gift. She walks not by day, but sleepsupon an island in the tree-shadowed lake of Lorellin. From the fountains of Irmoand Este all those who dwell in Valinor draw refreshment; and often the Valarcome themselves to Lorien and there find repose and easing of the burden ofArda.
Mightier than Este is Nienna, sister of the Feanturi; she dwells alone. She isacquainted with grief, and mourns for every wound that Arda has suffered in themarring of Melkor. So great was her sorrow, as the Music unfolded, that hersong turned to lamentation long before its end, and the sound of mourning waswoven into the themes of the World before it began. But she does not weep forherself; and those who hearken to her learn pity, and endurance in hope. Herhalls are west of West, upon the borders of the world; and she comes seldom tothe city of Valimar where all is glad. She goes rather to the halls of Mandos,which are near to her own; and all those who wait in Mandos cry to her, for shebrings strength to the spirit and turns sorrow to wisdom. The windows of herhouse look outward from the walls of the world.
Greatest in strength and deeds of prowess is Tulkas, who is surnamed Astaldo,the Valiant. He came last to Arda, to aid the Valar in the first battles with Melkor.He delights in wrestling and in contests of strength; and he rides no steed, for hecan outrun all things that go on feet, and he is tireless. His hair and beard aregolden, and his flesh ruddy; his weapons are his hands. He has little heed foreither the past or the future, and is of no avail as a counsellor, but is a hardyfriend. His spouse is Nessa, the sister of Orome, and she also is lithe andfleetfooted. Deer she loves, and they follow her train whenever she goes in thewild; but she can outrun them, swift as an arrow with the wind in her hair. Indancing she delights, and she dances in Valimar on lawns of never-fading green.
Orome is a mighty lord. If he is less strong than Tulkas, he is more dreadful inanger; whereas Tulkas laughs ever, in sport or in war, and even in the face ofMelkor he laughed in battles before the Elves were born. Orome loved the landsof Middle-earth, and he left them unwillingly and came last to Valinor; and often
of old he passed back east over the mountains and returned with his host to thehills and the plains. He is a hunter of monsters and fell beasts, and he delights inhorses and in hounds; and all trees he loves, for which reason he is calledAldaron, and by the Sindar Tauron, the Lord of Forests. Nahar is the name of hishorse, white in the sun, and shining silver at night. The Valaroma is the name ofhis great horn, the sound of which is like the upgoing of the Sun in scarlet, or thesheer lightning cleaving the clouds. Above all the horns of his host it was heardin the woods that Yavanna brought forth in Valinor; for there Orome would trainhis folk and his beasts for the pursuit of the evil creatures of Melkor. The spouseof Orome is Vana, the Ever-young; she is the younger sister of Yavanna. Allflowers spring as she passes and open if she glances upon them; and all birdssing at her coming.
These are the names of the Valar and the Valier, and here is told in brief theirlikenesses, such as the Eldar beheld them in Aman. But fair and noble as werethe forms in which they were manifest to the Children of Iluvatar, they were buta veil upon their beauty and their power. And if little is here said of all that theEldar once knew, that is as nothing compared with their true being, which goesback into regions and ages far beyond our thought. Among them Nine were ofchief power and reverence; but one is removed from their number, and Eightremain, the Aratar, the High Ones of Arda: Manwe and Varda, Ulmo, Yavannaand Aule, Mandos, Nienna, and Orome. Though Manwe is their King and holdstheir allegiance under Eru, in majesty they are peers, surpassing beyond compareall others, whether of the Valar and the Maiar, or of any other order that Iluvatarhas sent into Ea.
Of the Maiar
With the Valar came other spirits whose being also began before the World, ofthe same order as the Valar but of less degree. These are the Maiar, the people ofthe Valar, and their servants and helpers. Their number is not known to theElves, and few have names in any of the tongues of the Children of Iluvatar; forthough it is otherwise in Aman, in Middle-earth the Maiar have seldom appearedin form visible to Elves and Men.
Chief among the Maiar of Valinor whose names are remembered in thehistories of the Elder Days are Ilmare, the handmaid of Varda, and Eonwe, thebanner-bearer and herald of Manwe, whose might in arms is surpassed by none
in Arda. But of all the Maiar Osse and Uinen are best known to the Children ofIluvatar.
Osse is a vassal of Ulmo, and he is master of the seas that wash the shores ofMiddle-earth. He does not go in the deeps, but loves the coasts and the isles, andrejoices in the winds of Manwe; for in storm he delights, and laughs amid theroaring of the waves. His spouse is Uinen, the Lady of the Seas, whose hair liesspread through all waters under sky. All creatures she loves that live in the saltstreams, and all weeds that grow there; to her mariners cry, for she can lay calmupon the waves, restraining the wildness of Osse. The Numenoreans lived longin her protection, and held her in reverence equal to the Valar.
Melkor hated the Sea, for he could not subdue it. It is said that in the makingof Arda he endeavoured to draw Osse to his allegiance, promising to him all therealm and power of Ulmo, if he would serve him. So it was that long ago therearose great tumults in the sea that wrought ruin to the lands. But Uinen, at theprayer of Aule, restrained Osse and brought him before Ulmo; and he waspardoned and returned to his allegiance, to which he has remained faithful. Forthe most part; for the delight in violence has never wholly departed from him,and at times he will rage in his wilfulness without any command from Ulmo hislord. Therefore those who dwell by the sea or go up in ships may love him, butthey do not trust him.
Melian was the name of a Maia who served both Vana and Este; she dweltlong in Lorien, tending the trees that flower in the gardens of Irmo, ere she cameto Middle-earth. Nightingales sang about her wherever she went.
Wisest of the Maiar was Olorin. He too dwelt in Lorien, but his ways took himoften to the house of Nienna, and of her he learned pity and patience.
Of Melian much is told in the Quenta Silmarillion. But of Olorin that tale doesnot speak; for though he loved the Elves, he walked among them unseen, or inform as one of them, and they did not know whence came the fair visions or thepromptings of wisdom that he put into their hearts. In later days he was thefriend of all the Children of Iluvatar, and took pity on their sorrows; and thosewho listened to him awoke from despair and put away the imaginations ofdarkness.
Of the Enemies
Last of all is set the name of Melkor, He who arises in Might. But that name hehas forfeited; and the Noldor, who among the Elves suffered most from hismalice, will not utter it, and they name him Morgoth, the Dark Enemy of the
World. Great might was given to him by Iluvatar, and he was coeval withManwe. In the powers and knowledge of all the other Valar he had part, but heturned them to evil purposes, and squandered his strength in violence andtyranny. For he coveted Arda and all that was in it, desiring the kingship ofManwe and dominion over the realms of his peers.
From splendour he fell through arrogance to contempt for all things savehimself, a spirit wasteful and pitiless. Understanding he turned to subtlety inperverting to his own will all that he would use, until he became a liar withoutshame. He began with the desire of Light, but when he could not possess it forhimself alone, he descended through fire and wrath into a great burning, downinto Darkness. And darkness he used most in his evil works upon Arda, andfilled it with fear for all living things.
Yet so great was the power of his uprising that in ages forgotten he contendedwith Manwe and all the Valar, and through long years in Arda held dominionover most of the lands of the Earth. But he was not alone. For of the Maiar manywere drawn to his splendour in the days of his greatness, and remained in thatallegiance down into his darkness; and others he corrupted afterwards to hisservice with lies and treacherous gifts. Dreadful among these spirits were theValaraukar, the scourges of fire that in Middle-earth were called the Balrogs,demons of terror.
Among those of his servants that have names the greatest was that spiritwhom the Eldar called Sauron, or Gorthaur the Cruel. In his beginning he was ofthe Maiar of Aule, and he remained mighty in the lore of that people. In all thedeeds of Melkor the Morgoth upon Arda, in his vast works and in the deceits ofhis cunning, Sauron had a part, and was only less evil than his master in that forlong he served another and not himself. But in after years he rose like a shadowof Morgoth and a ghost of his malice, and walked behind him on the sameminous path down into the Void.
HERE ENDS THE VALAQUENTA
QUENTA SILMARILLION
The History of the Silmarils
CHAPTER 1
OF THE BEGINNING OF DAYS
It is told among the wise that the First War began before Arda was full-shaped,and ere yet there was anything that grew or walked upon earth; and for longMelkor had the upper hand. But in the midst of the war a spirit of great strengthand hardihood came to the aid of the Valar, hearing in the far heaven that therewas battle in the Little Kingdom; and Arda was filled with the sound of hislaughter. So came Tulkas the Strong, whose anger passes like a mighty wind,scattering cloud and darkness before it; and Melkor fled before his wrath and hislaughter, and forsook Arda, and there was peace for a long age. And Tulkasremained and became one of the Valar of the Kingdom of Arda; but Melkorbrooded in the outer darkness, and his hate was given to Tulkas for ever after.
In that time the Valar brought order to the seas and the lands and themountains, and Yavanna planted at last the seeds that she had long devised. Andsince, when the fires were subdued or buried beneath the primeval hills, therewas need of light, Aule at the prayer of Yavanna wrought two mighty lamps forthe lighting of the Middle-earth which he had built amid the encircling seas.Then Varda filled the lamps and Manwe hallowed them, and the Valar set themupon high pillars, more lofty far than are any mountains of the later days. Onelamp they raised near to the north of Middle-earth, and it was named Illuin; andthe other was raised in the south, and it was named Ormal; and the light of theLamps of the Valar flowed out over the Earth, so that all was lit as it were in achangeless day.
Then the seeds that Yavanna had sown began swiftly to sprout and to burgeon,and there arose a multitude of growing things great and small, mosses andgrasses and great ferns, and trees whose tops were crowned with cloud as theywere living mountains, but whose feet were wrapped in a green twilight. Andbeasts came forth and dwelt in the grassy plains, or in the rivers and the lakes, orwalked in the shadows of the woods. As yet no flower had bloomed nor any birdhad sung, for these things waited still their time in the bosom of Yavanna; butwealth there was of her imagining, and nowhere more rich than in the midmostparts of the Earth, where the light of both the Lamps met and blended. And thereupon the Isle of Almaren in the Great Lake was the first dwelling of the Valarwhen all things were young, and new-made green was yet a marvel in the eyes ofthe makers; and they were long content.
Now it came to pass that while the Valar rested from their labours, andwatched the growth and unfolding of the things that they had devised and begun,Manwe ordained a great feast; and the Valar and all their host came at his
bidding. But Aule and Tulkas were weary; for the craft of Aule and the strengthof Tulkas had been at the service of all without ceasing in the days of theirlabour. And Melkor knew of all that was done, for even then he had secretfriends and spies among the Maiar whom he had converted to his cause; and faroff in the darkness he was filled with hatred, being jealous of the work of hispeers, whom he desired to make subject to himself. Therefore he gathered tohimself spirits out of the halls of Ea that he had perverted to his service, and hedeemed himself strong. And seeing now his time he drew near again to Arda,and looked down upon it, and the beauty of the Earth in its Spring filled him themore with hate.
Now therefore the Valar were gathered upon Almaren, fearing no evil, andbecause of the light of Illuin they did not perceive the shadow in the north thatwas cast from afar by Melkor; for he was grown dark as the Night of the Void.And it is sung that in that feast of the Spring of Arda Tulkas espoused Nessa thesister of Orome, and she danced before the Valar upon the green grass ofAlmaren.
Then Tulkas slept, being weary and content, and Melkor deemed that his hourhad come. And he passed therefore over the Walls of the Night with his host, andcame to Middle-earth far in the north; and the Valar were not aware of him.
Now Melkor began the delving and building of a vast fortress, deep underEarth, beneath dark mountains where the beams of Illuin were cold and dim.That stronghold was named Utumno. And though the Valar knew naught of it asyet, nonetheless the evil of Melkor and the blight of his hatred flowed outthence, and the Spring of Arda was marred. Green things fell sick and rotted, andrivers were choked with weeds and slime, and fens were made, rank andpoisonous, the breeding place of flies; and forests grew dark and perilous, thehaunts of fear; and beasts became monsters of horn and ivory and dyed the earthwith blood. Then the Valar knew indeed that Melkor was at work again, and theysought for his hiding place. But Melkor, trusting in the strength of Utumno andthe might of his servants, came forth suddenly to war, and struck the first blow,ere the Valar were prepared; and he assailed the lights of Illuin and Ormal, andcast down their pillars and broke their lamps. In the overthrow of the mightypillars lands were broken and seas arose in tumult; and when the lamps werespilled destroying flame was poured out over the Earth. And the shape of Ardaand the symmetry of its waters and its lands was marred in that time, so that thefirst designs of the Valar were never after restored.
In the confusion and the darkness Melkor escaped, though fear fell upon him;for above the roaring of the seas he heard the voice of Manwe as a mighty wind,and the earth trembled beneath the feet of Tulkas. But he came to Utumno ere
Tulkas could overtake him; and there he lay hid. And the Valar could not at thattime overcome him, for the greater part of their strength was needed to restrainthe tumults of the Earth, and to save from ruin all that could be saved of theirlabour; and afterwards they feared to rend the Earth again, until they knew wherethe Children of Iluvatar were dwelling, who were yet to come in a time that washidden from the Valar.
Thus ended the Spring of Arda. The dwelling of the Valar upon Almaren wasutterly destroyed, and they had no abiding place upon the face of the Earth.Therefore they departed from Middle-earth and went to the Land of Aman, thewesternmost of all lands upon the borders of the world; for its west shoreslooked upon the Outer Sea, that is called by the Elves Ekkaia, encircling theKingdom of Arda. How wide is that sea none know but the Valar; and beyond itare the Walls of the Night. But the east shores of Aman were the uttermost endof Belegaer, the Great Sea of the West; and since Melkor was returned toMiddle-earth and they could not yet overcome him, the Valar fortified theirdwelling, and upon the shores of the sea they raised the Pelori, the Mountains ofAman, highest upon Earth. And above all the mountains of the Pelori was thatheight upon whose summit Manwe set his throne. Taniquetil the Elves name thatholy mountain, and Oiolosse Everlasting Whiteness, and Elerrina Crowned withStars, and many names beside; but the Sindar spoke of it in their later tongue asAmon Uilos. From their halls upon Taniquetil Manwe and Varda could look outacross the Earth even into the furthest East.
Behind the walls of the Pelori the Valar established their domain in that regionwhich is called Valinor; and there were their houses, their gardens, and theirtowers. In that guarded land the Valar gathered great store of light and all thefairest things that were saved from the ruin; and many others yet fairer theymade anew, and Valinor became more beautiful even than Middle-earth in theSpring of Arda; and it was blessed, for the Deathless dwelt there, and therenaught faded nor withered, neither was there any stain upon flower or leaf in thatland, nor any corruption or sickness in anything that lived; for the very stonesand waters were hallowed.
And when Valinor was full-wrought and the mansions of the Valar wereestablished, in the midst of the plain beyond the mountains they built their city,Valmar of many bells. Before its western gate there was a green mound,Ezellohar, that is named also Corollaire; and Yavanna hallowed it, and she sat
there long upon the green grass and sang a song of power, in which was set allher thought of things that grow in the earth. But Nienna thought in silence, andwatered the mould with tears. In that time the Valar were gathered together tohear the song of Yavanna, and they sat silent upon their thrones of council in theMahanaxar, the Ring of Doom near to the golden gates of Valmar; and YavannaKementari sang before them and they watched.
And as they watched, upon the mound there came forth two slender shoots;and silence was over all the world in that hour, nor was there any other soundsave the chanting of Yavanna. Under her song the saplings grew and became fairand tall, and came to flower; and thus there awoke in the world the Two Trees ofValinor. Of all things which Yavanna made they have most renown, and abouttheir fate all the tales of the Elder Days are woven.
The one had leaves of dark green that beneath were as shining silver, and fromeach of his countless flowers a dew of silver light was ever falling, and the earthbeneath was dappled with the shadows of his fluttering leaves. The other boreleaves of a young green like the new-opened beech; their edges were ofglittering gold. Flowers swung upon her branches in clusters of yellow flame,formed each to a glowing horn that spilled a golden rain upon the ground; andfrom the blossom of that tree there came forth warmth and a great light.Telperion the one was called in Valinor, and Silpion, and Ninquelote, and manyother names; but Laurelin the other was, and Malinalda, and Culurien, and manynames in song beside.
In seven hours the glory of each tree waxed to full and waned again to naught;and each awoke once more to life an hour before the other ceased to shine. Thusin Valinor twice every day there came a gentle hour of softer light when bothtrees were faint and their gold and silver beams were mingled. Telperion was theelder of the trees and came first to full stature and to bloom; and that first hour inwhich he shone, the white glimmer of a silver dawn, the Valar reckoned not intothe tale of hours, but named it the Opening Hour, and counted from it the ages oftheir reign in Valinor. Therefore at the sixth hour of the First Day, and of all thejoyful days thereafter, until the Darkening of Valinor, Telperion ceased his timeof flower; and at the twelfth hour Faurelin her blossoming. And each day of theValar in Aman contained twelve hours, and ended with the second mingling ofthe lights, in which Faurelin was waning but Telperion was waxing. But the lightthat was spilled from the trees endured long, ere it was taken up into the airs orsank down into the earth; and the dews of Telperion and the rain that fell fromFaurelin Varda hoarded in great vats like shining lakes, that were to all the landof the Valar as wells of water and of light. Thus began the Days of the Bliss ofValinor; and thus began also the Count of Time.
But as the ages drew on to the hour appointed by Iluvatar for the coming ofthe Firstborn, Middle-earth lay in a twilight beneath the stars that Varda hadwrought in the ages forgotten of her labours in Ea. And in the darkness Melkordwelt, and still often walked abroad, in many shapes of power and fear, and hewielded cold and fire, from the tops of the mountains to the deep furnaces thatare beneath them; and whatsoever was cruel or violent or deadly in those days islaid to his charge.
From the beauty and bliss of Valinor the Valar came seldom over themountains to Middle-earth, but gave to the land beyond the Pelori their care andtheir love. And in the midst of the Blessed Realm were the mansions of Aule,and there he laboured long. For in the making of all things in that land he had thechief part, and he wrought there many beautiful and shapely works both openlyand in secret. Of him comes the lore and knowledge of the Earth and of allthings that it contains: whether the lore of those that make not, but seek only forthe understanding of what is, or the lore of all craftsmen: the weaver, the shaperof wood, and the worker in metals; and the tiller and husbandman also, thoughthese last and all that deal with things that grow and bear fruit must look also tothe spouse of Aule, Yavanna Kementari. Aule it is who is named the Friend ofthe Noldor, for of him they learned much in after days, and they are the mostskilled of the Elves; and in their own fashion, according to the gifts whichIluvatar gave to them, they added much to his teaching, delighting in tonguesand in scripts, and in the figures of broidery, of drawing, and of carving. TheNoldor also it was who first achieved the making of gems; and the fairest of allgems were the Silmarils, and they are lost.
But Manwe Sulimo, highest and holiest of the Valar, sat upon the borders ofAman, forsaking not in his thought the Outer Lands. For his throne was set inmajesty upon the pinnacle of Taniquetil, the highest of the mountains of theworld, standing upon the margin of the sea. Spirits in the shape of hawks andeagles flew ever to and from his halls; and their eyes could see to the depths ofthe seas, and pierce the hidden caverns beneath the world. Thus they broughtword to him of well nigh all that passed in Arda; yet some things were hiddeneven from the eyes of Manwe and the servants of Manwe, for where Melkor satin his dark thought impenetrable shadows lay.
Manwe has no thought for his own honour, and is not jealous of his power, butrules all to peace. The Vanyar he loved best of all the Elves, and of him theyreceived song and poetry; for poetry is the delight of Manwe, and the song ofwords is his music. His raiment is blue, and blue is the fire of his eyes, and hissceptre is of sapphire, which the Noldor wrought for him; and he was appointedto be the vicegerent of Iluvatar, King of the world of Valar and Elves and Men,
and the chief defence against the evil of Melkor. With Manwe dwelt Varda themost beautiful, she who in the Sindarin tongue is named Elbereth, Queen of theValar, maker of the stars; and with them were a great host of spirits inblessedness.
But Ulmo was alone, and he abode not in Valinor, nor ever came thither unlessthere were need for a great council; he dwelt from the beginning of Arda in theOuter Ocean, and still he dwells there. Thence he governs the flowing of allwaters, and the ebbing, the courses of all rivers and the replenishment of springs,the distilling of all dews and rain in every land beneath the sky. In the deepplaces he gives thought to music great and terrible; and the echo of that musicruns through all the veins of the world in sorrow and in joy; for if joyful is thefountain that rises in the sun, its springs are in the wells of sorrow unfathomed atthe foundations of the Earth. The Teleri learned much of Ulmo, and for thisreason their music has both sadness and enchantment. Salmar came with him toArda, he who made the horns of Ulmo that none may ever forget who once hasheard them; and Osse and Uinen also, to whom he gave the government of thewaves and the movements of the Inner Seas, and many other spirits beside. Andthus it was by the power of Ulmo that even under the darkness of Melkor lifecoursed still through many secret lodes, and the Earth did not die; and to all whowere lost in that darkness or wandered far from the light of the Valar the ear ofUlmo was ever open; nor has he ever forsaken Middle-earth, and whatsoevermay since have befallen of ruin or of change he has not ceased to take thoughtfor it, and will not until the end of days.
And in that time of dark Yavanna also was unwilling utterly to forsake theOuter Lands; for all things that grow are dear to her, and she mourned for theworks that she had begun in Middle-earth but Melkor had marred. Thereforeleaving the house of Aule and the flowering meads of Valinor she would come attimes and heal the hurts of Melkor; and returning she would ever urge the Valarto that war with his evil dominion that they must surely wage ere the coming ofthe Firstborn. And Orome tamer of beasts would ride too at whiles in thedarkness of the unlit forests; as a mighty hunter he came with spear and bow,pursuing to the death the monsters and fell creatures of the kingdom of Melkor,and his white horse Nahar shone like silver in the shadows. Then the sleepingearth trembled at the beat of his golden hooves, and in the twilight of the worldOrome would sound the Valaroma his great horn upon the plains of Arda;whereat the mountains echoed, and the shadows of evil fled away, and Melkorhimself quailed in Utumno, foreboding the wrath to come. But even as Oromepassed the servants of Melkor would gather again; and the lands were filled withshadows and deceit.
Now all is said concerning the manner of the Earth and its rulers in thebeginning of days, and ere the world became such as the Children of Iluvatarhave known it. For Elves and Men are the Children of Iluvatar; and since theyunderstood not fully that theme by which the Children entered into the Music,none of the Ainur dared to add anything to their fashion. For which reason theValar are to these kindreds rather their elders and their chieftains than theirmasters; and if ever in their dealings with Elves and Men the Ainur haveendeavoured to force them when they would not be guided, seldom has thisturned to good, howsoever good the intent. The dealings of the Ainur haveindeed been mostly with the Elves, for Iluvatar made them more like in nature tothe Ainur, though less in might and stature; whereas to Men he gave strangegifts.
For it is said that after the departure of the Valar there was silence, and for anage Iluvatar sat alone in thought. Then he spoke and said: ‘Behold I love theEarth, which shall be a mansion for the Quendi and the Atani! But the Quendishall be the fairest of all earthly creatures, and they shall have and shall conceiveand bring forth more beauty than all my Children; and they shall have the greaterbliss in this world. But to the Atani I will give a new gift.’ Therefore he willedthat the hearts of Men should seek beyond the world and should find no resttherein; but they should have a virtue to shape their life, amid the powers andchances of the world, beyond the Music of the Ainur, which is as fate to allthings else; and of their operation everything should be, in form and deed,completed, and the world fulfilled unto the last and smallest.
But Iluvatar knew that Men, being set amid the turmoils of the powers of theworld, would stray often, and would not use their gifts in harmony; and he said,‘These too in their time shall find that all that they do redounds at the end only tothe glory of my work.’ Yet the Elves believe that Men are often a grief toManwe, who knows most of the mind of Iluvatar; for it seems to the Elves thatMen resemble Melkor most of all the Ainur, although he has ever feared andhated them, even those that served him.
It is one with this gift of freedom that the children of Men dwell only a shortspace in the world alive, and are not bound to it, and depart soon whither theElves know not. Whereas the Elves remain until the end of days, and their loveof the Earth and all the world is more single and more poignant therefore, and asthe years lengthen ever more sorrowful. For the Elves die not till the world dies,unless they are slain or waste in grief (and to both these seeming deaths they aresubject); neither does age subdue their strength, unless one grow weary of tenthousand centuries; and dying they are gathered to the halls of Mandos inValinor, whence they may in time return. But the sons of Men die indeed, and
leave the world; wherefore they are called the Guests, or the Strangers. Death istheir fate, the gift of Iluvatar, which as Time wears even the Powers shall envy.But Melkor has cast his shadow upon it, and confounded it with darkness, andbrought forth evil out of good, and fear out of hope. Yet of old the Valar declaredto the Elves in Valinor that Men shall join in the Second Music of the Ainur;whereas Iluvatar has not revealed what he purposes for the Elves after theWorld’s end, and Melkor has not discovered it.
CHAPTER 2
OF AULE AND YAVANNA
It is told that in their beginning the Dwarves were made by Aule in the darknessof Middle-earth; for so greatly did Aule desire the coming of the Children, tohave learners to whom he could teach his lore and his crafts, that he wasunwilling to await the fulfilment of the designs of Iluvatar. And Aule made theDwarves even as they still are, because the forms of the Children who were tocome were unclear to his mind, and because the power of Melkor was yet overthe Earth; and he wished therefore that they should be strong and unyielding. Butfearing that the other Valar might blame his work, he wrought in secret: and hemade first the Seven Fathers of the Dwarves in a hall under the mountains inMiddle-earth.
Now Iluvatar knew what was done, and in the very hour that Aule’s work wascomplete, and he was pleased, and began to instruct the Dwarves in the speechthat he had devised for them, Iluvatar spoke to him; and Aule heard his voiceand was silent. And the voice of Iluvatar said to him: ‘Why hast thou done this?Why dost thou attempt a thing which thou knowest is beyond thy power and thyauthority? For thou hast from me as a gift thy own being only, and no more; andtherefore the creatures of thy hand and mind can live only by that being, movingwhen thou thinkest to move them, and if thy thought be elsewhere, standing idle.Is that thy desire?’
Then Aule answered: ‘I did not desire such lordship. I desired things otherthan I am, to love and to teach them, so that they too might perceive the beautyof Ea, which thou hast caused to be. For it seemed to me that there is great roomin Arda for many things that might rejoice in it, yet it is for the most part emptystill, and dumb. And in my impatience I have fallen into folly. Yet the making ofthings is in my heart from my own making by thee; and the child of littleunderstanding that makes a play of the deeds of his father may do so withoutthought of mockery, but because he is the son of his father. But what shall I donow, so that thou be not angry with me for ever? As a child to his father, I offerto thee these things, the work of the hands which thou hast made. Do with themwhat thou wilt. But should I not rather destroy the work of my presumption?’
Then Aule took up a great hammer to smite the Dwarves; and he wept. ButIluvatar had compassion upon Aule and his desire, because of his humility; andthe Dwarves shrank from the hammer and were afraid, and they bowed downtheir heads and begged for mercy. And the voice of Iluvatar said to Aule: ‘Thyoffer I accepted even as it was made. Dost thou not see that these things havenow a life of their own, and speak with their own voices? Else they would not
have flinched from thy blow, nor from any command of thy will.’ Then Aule castdown his hammer and was glad, and he gave thanks to Iluvatar, saying: ‘MayEru bless my work and amend it! ’
But Iluvatar spoke again and said: ‘Even as I gave being to the thoughts of theAinur at the beginning of the World, so now I have taken up thy desire and givento it a place therein; but in no other way will I amend thy handiwork, and as thouhast made it, so shall it be. But I will not suffer this: that these should comebefore the Firstborn of my design, nor that thy impatience should be rewarded.They shall sleep now in the darkness under stone, and shall not come forth untilthe Firstborn have awakened upon Earth; and until that time thou and they shallwait, though long it seem. But when the time comes I will awaken them, andthey shall be to thee as children; and often strife shall arise between thine andmine, the children of my adoption and the children of my choice.’
Then Aule took the Seven Fathers of the Dwarves, and laid them to rest in far-sundered places; and he returned to Valinor, and waited while the long yearslengthened.
Since they were to come in the days of the power of Melkor, Aule made theDwarves strong to endure. Therefore they are stone-hard, stubborn, fast infriendship and in enmity, and they suffer toil and hunger and hurt of body morehardily than all other speaking peoples; and they live long, far beyond the spanof Men, yet not for ever. Aforetime it was held among the Elves in Middle-earththat dying the Dwarves returned to the earth and the stone of which they weremade; yet that is not their own belief. For they say that Aule the Maker, whomthey call Mahal, cares for them, and gathers them to Mandos in halls set apart;and that he declared to their Fathers of old that Iluvatar will hallow them andgive them a place among the Children in the End. Then their part shall be toserve Aule and to aid him in the remaking of Arda after the East Battle. They sayalso that the Seven Fathers of the Dwarves return to live again in their own kinand to bear once more their ancient names: of whom Durin was the mostrenowned in after ages, father of that kindred most friendly to the Elves, whosemansions were at Khazad-dum.
Now when Aule laboured in the making of the Dwarves he kept this workhidden from the other Valar; but at last he opened his mind to Yavanna and toldher of all that had come to pass. Then Yavanna said to him: ‘Eru is merciful.Now I see that thy heart rejoiceth, as indeed it may; for thou hast received notonly forgiveness but bounty. Yet because thou hiddest this thought from me untilits achievement, thy children will have little love for the things of my love. They
will love first the things made by their own hands, as doth their father. They willdelve in the earth, and the things that grow and live upon the earth they will notheed. Many a tree shall feel the bite of their iron without pity.’
But Aule answered: ‘That shall also be true of the Children of Iluvatar; forthey will eat and they will build. And though the things of thy realm have worthin themselves, and would have worth if no Children were to come, yet Eru willgive them dominion, and they shall use all that they find in Arda: though not, bythe purpose of Eru, without respect or without gratitude . 5
‘Not unless Melkor darken their hearts , 5 said Yavanna. And she was notappeased, but grieved in heart, fearing what might be done upon Middle-earth indays to come. Therefore she went before Manwe, and she did not betray thecounsel of Aule, but she said: ‘King of Arda, is it true, as Aule hath said to me,that the Children when they come shall have dominion over all the things of mylabour, to do as they will therewith ? 5
‘It is true , 5 said Manwe. ‘But why dost thou ask, for thou hadst no need of theteaching of Aule ? 5
Then Yavanna was silent and looked into her own thought. And she answered:‘Because my heart is anxious, thinking of the days to come. All my works aredear to me. Is it not enough that Melkor should have marred so many? Shallnothing that I have devised be free from the dominion of others ? 5
‘If thou hadst thy will what wouldst thou reserve ? 5 said Manwe. ‘Of all thyrealm what dost thou hold dearest ? 5
‘All have their worth , 5 said Yavanna, ‘and each contributes to the worth of theothers. But the kelvar can flee or defend themselves, whereas the olvar that growcannot. And among these I hold trees dear. Long in the growing, swift shall theybe in the felling, and unless they pay toll with fruit upon bough little mourned intheir passing. So I see in my thought. Would that the trees might speak on behalfof all things that have roots, and punish those that wrong them ! 5
‘This is a strange thought , 5 said Manwe.
‘Yet it was in the Song , 5 said Yavanna. ‘For while thou wert in the heavensand with Ulmo built the clouds and poured out the rains, I lifted up the branchesof great trees to receive them, and some sang to Iluvatar amid the wind and therain . 5
Then Manwe sat silent, and the thought of Yavanna that she had put into hisheart grew and unfolded; and it was beheld by Iluvatar. Then it seemed toManwe that the Song rose once more about him, and he heeded now manythings therein that though he had heard them he had not heeded before. And atlast the Vision was renewed, but it was not now remote, for he was himselfwithin it, and yet he saw that all was upheld by the hand of Iluvatar; and the
hand entered in, and from it came forth many wonders that had until then beenhidden from him in the hearts of the Ainur.
Then Manwe awoke, and he went down to Yavanna upon Ezellohar, and he satbeside her beneath the Two Trees. And Manwe said: 'O Kementari, Eru hathspoken, saying: “Do then any of the Valar suppose that I did not hear all theSong, even the least sound of the least voice? Behold! When the Childrenawake, then the thought of Yavanna will awake also, and it will summon spiritsfrom afar, and they will go among the kelvar and the o/var, and some will dwelltherein, and be held in reverence, and their just anger shall be feared. For a time:while the Firstborn are in their power, and while the Secondborn are young.” Butdost thou not now remember, Kementari, that thy thought sang not always alone?Did not thy thought and mine meet also, so that we took wing together like greatbirds that soar above the clouds? That also shall come to be by the heed ofIluvatar, and before the Children awake there shall go forth with wings like thewind the Eagles of the Lords of the West?
Then Yavanna was glad, and she stood up, reaching her arms towards theheavens, and she said: 'High shall climb the trees of Kementari, that the Eaglesof the King may house therein ! 5
But Manwe rose also, and it seemed that he stood to such a height that hisvoice came down to Yavanna as from the paths of the winds.
‘Nay? he said, 'only the trees of Aule will be tall enough. In the mountains theEagles shall house, and hear the voices of those who call upon us. But in theforests shall walk the Shepherds of the Trees?
Then Manwe and Yavanna parted for that time, and Yavanna returned to Aule;and he was in his smithy, pouring molten metal into a mould. 'Eru is bountiful?she said. ‘Now let thy children beware! For there shall walk a power in theforests whose wrath they will arouse at their peril?
‘Nonetheless they will have need of wood? said Aule, and he went on with hissmith-work.
CHAPTER 3
OF THE COMING OF THE ELVES AND THE CAPTIVITY OF
MELKOR
Through long ages the Valar dwelt in bliss in the light of the Trees beyond theMountains of Aman, but all Middle-earth lay in a twilight under the stars. Whilethe Lamps had shone, growth began there which now was checked, because allwas again dark. But already the oldest living things had arisen: in the seas thegreat weeds, and on earth the shadow of great trees; and in the valleys of thenight-clad hills there were dark creatures old and strong. To those lands andforests the Valar seldom came, save only Yavanna and Orome; and Yavannawould walk there in the shadows, grieving because the growth and promise ofthe Spring of Arda was stayed. And she set a sleep upon many things that hadarisen in the Spring, so that they should not age, but should wait for a time ofawakening that yet should be.
But in the north Melkor built his strength, and he slept not, but watched, andlaboured; and the evil things that he had perverted walked abroad, and the darkand slumbering woods were haunted by monsters and shapes of dread. And inUtumno he gathered his demons about him, those spirits who first adhered tohim in the days of his splendour, and became most like him in his corruption:their hearts were of fire, but they were cloaked in darkness, and terror wentbefore them; they had whips of flame. Balrogs they were named in Middle-earthin later days. And in that dark time Melkor bred many other monsters of diversshapes and kinds that long troubled the world; and his realm spread now eversouthward over Middle-earth.
And Melkor made also a fortress and armoury not far from the north-westernshores of the sea, to resist any assault that might come from Aman. Thatstronghold was commanded by Sauron, lieutenant of Melkor; and it was namedAngband.
It came to pass that the Valar held council, for they became troubled by thetidings that Yavanna and Orome brought from the Outer Lands; and Yavannaspoke before the Valar, saying: ‘Ye mighty of Arda, the Vision of Iluvatar wasbrief and soon taken away, so that maybe we cannot guess within a narrow countof days the hour appointed. Yet be sure of this: the hour approaches, and withinthis age our hope shall be revealed, and the Children shall awake. Shall we thenleave the lands of their dwelling desolate and full of evil? Shall they walk indarkness while we have light? Shall they call Melkor lord while Manwe sits
upon Taniquetil?’
And Tulkas cried: 'Nay! Let us make war swiftly! Have we not rested fromstrife overlong, and is not our strength now renewed? Shall one alone contestwith us for ever?’
But at the bidding of Manwe Mandos spoke, and he said: ‘In this age theChildren of Iluvatar shall come indeed, but they come not yet. Moreover it isdoom that the Firstborn shall come in the darkness, and shall look first upon thestars. Great light shall be for their waning. To Varda ever shall they call at need?
Then Varda went forth from the council, and she looked out from the height ofTaniquetil, and beheld the darkness of Middle-earth beneath the innumerablestars, faint and far. Then she began a great labour, greatest of all the works of theValar since their coming into Arda. She took the silver dews from the vats ofTelperion, and therewith she made new stars and brighter against the coming ofthe Firstborn; wherefore she whose name out of the deeps of time and thelabours of Ea was Tintalle, the Kindler, was called after by the Elves Elentari,Queen of the Stars. Carnil and Luinil, Nenar and Lumbar, Alcarinque andElemmire she wrought in that time, and many other of the ancient stars shegathered together and set as signs in the heavens of Arda: Wilwarin, Telumendil,Soronume, and Anarrima; and Menelmacar with his shining belt, that forebodesthe Last Battle that shall be at the end of days. And high in the north as achallenge to Melkor she set the crown of seven mighty stars to swing, Valacirca,the Sickle of the Valar and sign of doom.
It is told that even as Varda ended her labours, and they were long, when firstMenelmacar strode up the sky and the blue fire of Helluin flickered in the mistsabove the borders of the world, in that hour the Children of the Earth awoke, theFirstborn of Iluvatar. By the starlit mere of Cuivienen, Water of Awakening, theyrose from the sleep of Iluvatar; and while they dwelt yet silent by Cuivienentheir eyes beheld first of all things the stars of heaven. Therefore they have everloved the starlight, and have revered Varda Elentari above all the Valar.
In the changes of the world the shapes of lands and of seas have been brokenand remade; rivers have not kept their courses, neither have mountains remainedsteadfast; and to Cuivienen there is no returning. But it is said among the Elvesthat it lay far off in the east of Middle-earth, and northward, and it was a bay inthe Inland Sea of Helcar; and that sea stood where aforetime the roots of themountain of Illuin had been before Melkor overthrew it. Many waters floweddown thither from heights in the east, and the first sound that was heard by theElves was the sound of water flowing, and the sound of water falling over stone.
Long they dwelt in their first home by the water under stars, and they walkedthe Earth in wonder; and they began to make speech and to give names to all
things that they perceived. Themselves they named the Quendi, signifying thosethat speak with voices; for as yet they had met no other living things that spokeor sang.
And on a time it chanced that Orome rode eastward in his hunting, and heturned north by the shores of Helcar and passed under the shadows of theOrocarni, the Mountains of the East. Then on a sudden Nahar set up a greatneighing, and stood still. And Orome wondered and sat silent, and it seemed tohim that in the quiet of the land under the stars he heard afar off many voicessinging.
Thus it was that the Valar found at last, as it were by chance, those whom theyhad so long awaited. And Orome looking upon the Elves was filled with wonder,as though they were beings sudden and marvellous and unforeseen; for so it shallever be with the Valar. From without the World, though all things may beforethought in music or foreshown in vision from afar, to those who enter verilyinto Ea each in its time shall be met at unawares as something new andunforetold.
In the beginning the Elder Children of Iluvatar were stronger and greater thanthey have since become; but not more fair, for though the beauty of the Quendiin the days of their youth was beyond all other beauty that Iluvatar has caused tobe, it has not perished, but lives in the West, and sorrow and wisdom haveenriched it. And Orome loved the Quendi, and named them in their own tongueEldar, the people of the stars; but that name was after borne only by those whofollowed him upon the westward road.
Yet many of the Quendi were filled with dread at his coming; and this was thedoing of Melkor. For by after-knowledge the wise declare that Melkor, everwatchful, was first aware of the awakening of the Quendi, and sent shadows andevil spirits to spy upon them and waylay them. So it came to pass, some yearsere the coming of Orome, that if any of the Elves strayed far abroad, alone orfew together, they would often vanish, and never return; and the Quendi said thatthe Hunter had caught them, and they were afraid. And indeed the most ancientsongs of the Elves, of which echoes are remembered still in the West, tell of theshadow-shapes that walked in the hills above Cuivienen, or would pass suddenlyover the stars; and of the dark Rider upon his wild horse that pursued those thatwandered to take them and devour them. Now Melkor greatly hated and fearedthe riding of Orome, and either he sent indeed his dark servants as riders, or heset lying whispers abroad, for the purpose that the Quendi should shun Orome, ifever they should meet.
Thus it was that when Nahar neighed and Orome indeed came among them,some of the Quendi hid themselves, and some fled and were lost. But those that
had courage, and stayed, perceived swiftly that the Great Rider was no shape outof darkness; for the light of Aman was in his face, and all the noblest of theElves were drawn towards it.
But of those unhappy ones who were ensnared by Melkor little is known of acertainty. For who of the living has descended into the pits of Utumno, or hasexplored the darkness of the counsels of Melkor? Yet this is held true by the wiseof Eressea, that all those of the Quendi who came into the hands of Melkor, ereUtumno was broken, were put there in prison, and by slow arts of cruelty werecorrupted and enslaved; and thus did Melkor breed the hideous race of the Oresin envy and mockery of the Elves, of whom they were afterwards the bitterestfoes. For the Ores had life and multiplied after the manner of the Children ofIluvatar; and naught that had life of its own, nor the semblance of life, could everMelkor make since his rebellion in the Ainulindale before the Beginning: so saythe wise. And deep in their dark hearts the Ores loathed the Master whom theyserved in fear, the maker only of their misery. This it may be was the vilest deedof Melkor, and the most hateful to Iluvatar.
Orome tarried a while among the Quendi, and then swiftly he rode back overland and sea to Valinor and brought the tidings to Valmar; and he spoke of theshadows that troubled Cuivienen. Then the Valar rejoiced, and yet they were indoubt amid their joy; and they debated long what counsel it were best to take forthe guarding of the Quendi from the shadow of Melkor. But Orome returned atonce to Middle-earth and abode with the Elves.
Manwe sat long in thought upon Taniquetil, and he sought the counsel ofIluvatar. And coming then down to Valmar he summoned the Valar to the Ringof Doom, and thither came even Ulmo from the Outer Sea.
Then Manwe said to the Valar: ‘This is the counsel of Iluvatar in my heart:that we should take up again the mastery of Arda, at whatsoever cost, and deliverthe Quendi from the shadow of Melkor? Then Tulkas was glad; but Aule wasgrieved, foreboding the hurts of the world that must come of that strife. But theValar made ready and came forth from Aman in strength of war, resolving toassault the fortresses of Melkor and make an end. Never did Melkor forget thatthis war was made for the sake of the Elves, and that they were the cause of hisdownfall. Yet they had no part in those deeds, and they know little of the ridingof the might of the West against the North in the beginning of their days.
Melkor met the onset of the Valar in the North-west of Middle-earth, and allthat region was much broken. But the first victory of the hosts of the West wasswift, and the servants of Melkor fled before them to Utumno. Then the Valar
passed over Middle-earth, and they set a guard over Cuivienen; and thereafterthe Quendi knew nothing of the great Battle of the Powers, save that the Earthshook and groaned beneath them, and the waters were moved, and in the norththere were lights as of mighty fires. Long and grievous was the siege of Utumno,and many battles were fought before its gates of which naught but the rumour isknown to the Elves. In that time the shape of Middle-earth was changed, and theGreat Sea that sundered it from Aman grew wide and deep; and it broke in uponthe coasts and made a deep gulf to the southward. Many lesser bays were madebetween the Great Gulf and Helcaraxe far in the north, where Middle-earth andAman came nigh together. Of these the Bay of Balar was the chief; and into itthe mighty river Sirion flowed down from the new-raised highlands northwards:Dorthonion, and the mountains about Hithlum. The lands of the far north wereall made desolate in those days; for there Utumno was delved exceeding deep,and its pits were filled with fires and with great hosts of the servants of Melkor.
But at the last the gates of Utumno were broken and the halls unroofed, andMelkor took refuge in the uttermost pit. Then Tulkas stood forth as champion ofthe Valar and wrestled with him, and cast him upon his face; and he was boundwith the chain Angainor that Aule had wrought, and led captive; and the worldhad peace for a long age.
Nonetheless the Valar did not discover all the mighty vaults and cavernshidden with deceit far under the fortresses of Angband and Utumno. Many evilthings still lingered there, and others were dispersed and fled into the dark androamed in the waste places of the world, awaiting a more evil hour; and Sauronthey did not find.
But when the Battle was ended and from the ruin of the North great cloudsarose and hid the stars, the Valar drew Melkor back to Valinor, bound hand andfoot, and blindfold; and he was brought to the Ring of Doom. There he lay uponhis face before the feet of Manwe and sued for pardon; but his prayer wasdenied, and he was cast into prison in the fastness of Mandos, whence none canescape, neither Vala, nor Elf, nor mortal Man. Vast and strong are those halls,and they were built in the west of the land of Aman. There was Melkor doomedto abide for three ages long, before his cause should be tried anew, or he shouldplead again for pardon.
Then again the Valar were gathered in council, and they were divided indebate. For some, and of those Ulmo was the chief, held that the Quendi shouldbe left free to walk as they would in Middle-earth, and with their gifts of skill toorder all the lands and heal their hurts. But the most part feared for the Quendi inthe dangerous world amid the deceits of the starlit dusk; and they were filledmoreover with the love of the beauty of the Elves and desired their fellowship.
At the last, therefore, the Valar summoned the Quendi to Valinor, there to begathered at the knees of the Powers in the light of the Trees for ever; andMandos broke his silence, saying: ‘So it is doomed.’ From this summons camemany woes that afterwards befell.
But the Elves were at first unwilling to hearken to the summons, for they hadas yet seen the Valar only in their wrath as they went to war, save Orome alone;and they were filled with dread. Therefore Orome was sent again to them, and hechose from among them ambassadors who should go to Valinor and speak fortheir people; and these were Ingwe, Finwe, and Elwe, who afterwards werekings. And coming they were filled with awe by the glory and majesty of theValar, and desired greatly the light and splendour of the Trees. Then Oromebrought them back to Cuivienen, and they spoke before their people, andcounselled them to heed the summons of the Valar and remove into the West.
Then befell the first sundering of the Elves. For the kindred of Ingwe, and themost part of the kindreds of Finwe and Elwe, were swayed by the words of theirlords, and were willing to depart and follow Orome: and these were known everafter as the Eldar, by the name that Orome gave to the Elves in the beginning, intheir own tongue. But many refused the summons, preferring the starlight andthe wide spaces of Middle-earth to the rumour of the Trees; and these are theAvari, the Unwilling, and they were sundered in that time from the Eldar, andmet never again until many ages were past.
The Eldar prepared now a great march from their first homes in the east; andthey were arrayed in three hosts. The smallest host and the first to set forth wasled by Ingwe, the most high lord of all the Elvish race. He entered into Valinorand sits at the feet of the Powers, and all Elves revere his name; but he camenever back, nor looked again upon Middle-earth. The Vanyar were his people;they are the Fair Elves, the beloved of Manwe and Varda, and few among Menhave spoken with them.
Next came the Noldor, a name of wisdom, the people of Finwe. They are theDeep Elves, the friends of Aule; and they are renowned in song, for they foughtand laboured long and grievously in the northern lands of old.
The greatest host came last, and they are named the Teleri, for they tarried onthe road, and were not wholly of a mind to pass from the dusk to the light ofValinor. In water they had great delight, and those that came at last to thewestern shores were enamoured of the sea. The Sea-elves therefore they becamein the land of Aman, the Falmari, for they made music beside the breakingwaves. Two lords they had, for their numbers were great: Elwe Singollo (whichsignifies Greymantle) and Olwe his brother.
These were the three kindreds of the Eldalie, who passing at length into the
uttermost West in the days of the Trees are called the Calaquendi, Elves of theLight. But others of the Eldar there were who set out indeed upon the westwardmarch, but became lost upon the long road, or turned aside, or lingered on theshores of Middle-earth; and these were for the most part of the kindred of theTeleri, as is told hereafter. They dwelt by the sea, or wandered in the woods andmountains of the world, yet their hearts were turned towards the West. ThoseElves the Calaquendi call the Umanyar, since they came never to the land ofAman and the Blessed Realm; but the Umanyar and the Avari alike they call theMoriquendi, Elves of the Darkness, for they never beheld the Light that wasbefore the Sun and Moon.
It is told that when the hosts of the Eldalie departed from Cuivienen Oromerode at their head upon Nahar, his white horse shod with gold; and passingnorthward about the Sea of Helcar they turned towards the west. Before themgreat clouds hung still black in the North above the ruins of war, and the stars inthat region were hidden. Then not a few grew afraid and repented, and turnedback, and are forgotten.
Long and slow was the march of the Eldar into the west, for the leagues ofMiddle-earth were uncounted, and weary and pathless. Nor did the Eldar desireto hasten, for they were filled with wonder at all that they saw, and by manylands and rivers they wished to abide; and though all were yet willing to wander,many feared rather their journey’s end than hoped for it. Therefore wheneverOrome departed, having at times other matters to heed, they halted and wentforward no more, until he returned to guide them. And it came to pass aftermany years of journeying in this manner that the Eldar took their course througha forest, and they came to a great river, wider than any they had yet seen; andbeyond it were mountains whose sharp horns seemed to pierce the realm of thestars. This river, it is said, was even the river which was after called Anduin theGreat, and was ever the frontier of the west-lands of Middle-earth. But themountains were the Hithaeglir, the Towers of Mist upon the borders of Eriador;yet they were taller and more terrible in those days, and were reared by Melkorto hinder the riding of Orome. Now the Teleri abode long on the east bank of thatriver and wished to remain there, but the Vanyar and the Noldor passed over it,and Orome led them into the passes of the mountains. And when Orome wasgone forward the Teleri looked upon the shadowy heights and were afraid.
Then one arose in the host of Olwe, which was ever the hindmost on the road;Lenwe he was called. He forsook the westward march, and led away a numerouspeople, southwards down the great river, and they passed out of the knowledge
of their kin until long years were past. Those were the Nandor; and they becamea people apart, unlike their kin, save that they loved water, and dwelt mostbeside falls and running streams. Greater knowledge they had of living things,tree and herb, bird and beast, than all other Elves. In after years Denethor, son ofLenwe, turned again west at last, and led a part of that people over the mountainsinto Beleriand ere the rising of the Moon.
At length the Vanyar and the Noldor came over Ered Luin, the BlueMountains, between Eriador and the westernmost land of Middle-earth, whichthe Elves after named Beleriand; and the foremost companies passed over theVale of Sirion and came down to the shores of the Great Sea between Drengistand the Bay of Balar. But when they beheld it great fear came upon them, andmany withdrew into the woods and highlands of Beleriand. Then Oromedeparted, and returned to Valinor to seek the counsel of Manwe, and left them.
And the host of the Teleri passed over the Misty Mountains, and crossed thewide lands of Eriador, being urged on by Elwe Singollo, for he was eager toreturn to Valinor and the Light that he had beheld; and he wished not to besundered from the Noldor, for he had great friendship with Finwe their lord.Thus after many years the Teleri also came at last over Ered Luin into the easternregions of Beleriand. There they halted, and dwelt a while beyond the RiverGelion.
CHAPTER 4
OF THINGOL AND MELIAN
Melian was a Maia, of the race of the Valar. She dwelt in the gardens of Lorien,and among all his people there were none more beautiful than Melian, nor morewise, nor more skilled in songs of enchantment. It is told that the Valar wouldleave their works, and the birds of Valinor their mirth, that the bells of Valmarwere silent and the fountains ceased to flow, when at the mingling of the lightsMelian sang in Lorien. Nightingales went always with her, and she taught themtheir song; and she loved the deep shadows of the great trees. She was akinbefore the World was made to Yavanna herself; and in that time when theQuendi awoke beside the waters of Cuivienen she departed from Valinor andcame to the Hither Lands, and there she filled the silence of Middle-earth beforethe dawn with her voice and the voices of her birds.
Now when their journey was near its end, as has been told, the people of theTeleri rested long in East Beleriand, beyond the River Gelion; and at that timemany of the Noldor still lay to the westward, in those forests that wereafterwards named Neldoreth and Region. Elwe, lord of the Teleri, went oftenthrough the great woods to seek out Finwe his friend in the dwellings of theNoldor; and it chanced on a time that he came alone to the starlit wood of NanElmoth, and there suddenly he heard the song of nightingales. Then anenchantment fell on him, and he stood still; and afar off beyond the voices of thelomelindi he heard the voice of Melian, and it filled all his heart with wonder anddesire. He forgot then utterly all his people and all the purposes of his mind, andfollowing the birds under the shadow of the trees he passed deep into NanElmoth and was lost. But he came at last to a glade open to the stars, and thereMelian stood; and out of the darkness he looked at her, and the light of Amanwas in her face.
She spoke no word; but being filled with love Elwe came to her and took herhand, and straightway a spell was laid on him, so that they stood thus while longyears were measured by the wheeling stars above them; and the trees of NanElmoth grew tall and dark before they spoke any word.
Thus Elwe’s folk who sought him found him not, and Olwe took the kingshipof the Teleri and departed, as is told hereafter. Elwe Singollo came never againacross the sea to Valinor so long as he lived, and Melian returned not thitherwhile their realm together lasted; but of her there came among both Elves andMen a strain of the Ainur who were with Iluvatar before Ea. In after days hebecame a king renowned, and his people were all the Eldar of Beleriand; theSindar they were named, the Grey-elves, the Elves of the Twilight, and King
Greymantle was he, Elu Thingol in the tongue of that land. And Melian was hisQueen, wiser than any child of Middle-earth; and their hidden halls were inMenegroth, the Thousand Caves, in Doriath. Great power Melian lent toThingol, who was himself great among the Eldar; for he alone of all the Sindarhad seen with his own eyes the Trees in the day of their flowering, and kingthough he was of Umanyar, he was not accounted among the Moriquendi, butwith the Elves of the Light, mighty upon Middle-earth. And of the love ofThingol and Melian there came into the world the fairest of all the Children ofIluvatar that was or shall ever be.
CHAPTER 5
OF ELDAMAR AND THE PRINCES OF THE ELDALIE
In time the hosts of the Vanyar and the Noldor came to the last western shores ofthe Hither Lands. In the north these shores, in the ancient days after the Battle ofthe Powers, bent ever westward, until in the northernmost parts of Arda only anarrow sea divided Aman, upon which Valinor was built, from the Hither Lands;but this narrow sea was filled with grinding ice, because of the violence of thefrosts of Melkor. Therefore Orome did not lead the hosts of the Eldalie into thefar north, but brought them to the fair lands about the River Sirion, thatafterwards were named Beleriand; and from those shores whence first the Eldarlooked in fear and wonder on the Sea there stretched an ocean, wide and darkand deep, between them and the Mountains of Aman.
Now Ulmo, by the counsel of the Valar, came to the shores of Middle-earthand spoke with the Eldar who waited there, gazing on the dark waves; andbecause of his words and the music which he made for them on his horns of shelltheir fear of the sea was turned rather to desire. Therefore Ulmo uprooted anisland which long had stood alone amid the sea, far from either shore, since thetumults of the fall of Illuin; and with the aid of his servants he moved it, as itwere a mighty ship, and anchored it in the Bay of Balar, into which Sirionpoured his water. Then the Vanyar and the Noldor embarked upon that isle, andwere drawn over the sea, and came at last to the long shores beneath theMountains of Aman; and they entered Valinor and were welcomed to its bliss.But the eastern horn of the island, which was deep-grounded in the shoals off themouths of Sirion, was broken asunder and remained behind; and that, it is said,was the Isle of Balar, to which afterwards Osse often came.
But the Teleri remained still in Middle-earth, for they dwelt in East Beleriandfar from the sea, and they heard not the summons of Ulmo until too late; andmany searched still for Elwe their lord, and without him they were unwilling todepart. But when they learned that Ingwe and Finwe and their peoples weregone, then many of the Teleri pressed on to the shores of Beleriand, and dweltthereafter near the Mouths of Sirion, in longing for their friends that haddeparted; and they took Olwe, Elwe’s brother, to be their king. Long theyremained by the coasts of the western sea, and Osse and Uinen came to them andbefriended them; and Osse instructed them, sitting upon a rock near to themargin of the land, and of him they learned all manner of sea-lore and sea-music. Thus it came to be that the Teleri, who were from the beginning lovers ofwater, and the fairest singers of all the Elves, were after enamoured of the seas,and their songs were filled with the sound of waves upon the shore.
When many years had passed, Ulmo hearkened to the prayers of the Noldorand of Finwe their king, who grieved at their long sundering from the Teleri, andbesought him to bring them to Aman, if they would come. And most of themproved now willing indeed; but great was the grief of Osse when Ulmo returnedto the coasts of Beleriand, to bear them away to Valinor; for his care was for theseas of Middle-earth and the shores of the Hither Lands, and he was ill-pleasedthat the voices of the Teleri should be heard no more in his domain. Some hepersuaded to remain; and those were the Falathrim, the Elves of the Falas, whoin after days had dwellings at the havens of Brithombar and E glare st, the firstmariners in Middle-earth and the first makers of ships. Cirdan the Shipwrightwas their lord.
The kinsfolk and friends of Elwe Singollo also remained in the Hither Lands,seeking him yet, though they would fain have departed to Valinor and the lightof the Trees, if Ulmo and Olwe had been willing to tarry longer. But Olwe wouldbe gone; and at last the main host of the Teleri embarked upon the isle, and Ulmodrew them far away. Then the friends of Elwe were left behind; and they calledthemselves Eglath, the Forsaken People. They dwelt in the woods and hills ofBeleriand, rather than by the sea, which filled them with sorrow; but the desireof Aman was ever in their hearts.
But when Elwe awoke from his long trance, he came forth from Nan Elmothwith Melian, and they dwelt thereafter in the woods in the midst of the land.Greatly though he had desired to see again the light of the Trees, in the face ofMelian he beheld the light of Aman as in an unclouded mirror, and in that lighthe was content. His people gathered about him in joy, and they were amazed; forfair and noble as he had been, now he appeared as it were a lord of the Maiar, hishair as grey silver, tallest of all the Children of Iluvatar; and a high doom wasbefore him.
Now Osse followed after the host of Olwe, and when they were come to theBay of Eldamar (which is Elvenhome) he called to them; and they knew hisvoice, and begged Ulmo to stay their voyage. And Ulmo granted their request,and at his bidding Osse made fast the island and rooted it to the foundations ofthe sea. Ulmo did this the more readily, for he understood the hearts of theTeleri, and in the council of the Valar he had spoken against the summons,thinking that it were better for the Quendi to remain in Middle-earth. The Valarwere little pleased to learn what he had done; and Finwe grieved when the Telericame not, and yet more when he learned that Elwe was forsaken, and knew thathe should not see him again, unless it were in the halls of Mandos. But the islandwas not moved again, and stood there alone in the Bay of Eldamar; and it wascalled Tol Eressea, the Lonely Isle. There the Teleri abode as they wished underthe stars of heaven, and yet within sight of Aman and the deathless shore; and bythat long sojourn apart in the Lonely Isle was caused the sundering of theirspeech from that of the Vanyar and the Noldor.
To these the Valar had given a land and a dwelling-place. Even among theradiant flowers of the Tree-lit gardens of Valinor they longed still at times to seethe stars; and therefore a gap was made in the great walls of the Pelori, and therein a deep valley that ran down to the sea the Eldar raised a high green hill: Tunait was called. From the west the light of the Trees fell upon it, and its shadow layever eastward; and to the east it looked towards the Bay of Elvenhome, and theLonely Isle, and the Shadowy Seas. Then through the Calacirya, the Pass ofLight, the radiance of the Blessed Realm streamed forth, kindling the dark wavesto silver and gold, and it touched the Lonely Isle, and its western shore grewgreen and fair. There bloomed the first flowers that ever were east of theMountains of Aman.
Upon the crown of Tuna the city of the Elves was built, the white walls andterraces of Tirion; and the highest of the towers of that city was the Tower ofIngwe, Mindon Eldalieva, whose silver lamp shone far out into the mists of thesea. Few are the ships of mortal Men that have seen its slender beam. In Tirionupon Tuna the Vanyar and the Noldor dwelt long in fellowship. And since of allthings in Valinor they loved most the White Tree, Yavanna made for them a treelike to a lesser image of Telperion, save that it did not give light of its ownbeing; Galathilion it was named in the Sindarin tongue. This tree was planted inthe courts beneath the Mindon and there flourished, and its seedlings were manyin Eldamar. Of these one was afterwards planted in Tol Eressea, and it prospered
there, and was named Celeborn; thence came in the fullness of time, as iselsewhere told, Nimloth, the White Tree of Numenor.
Manwe and Varda loved most the Vanyar, the Fair Elves; but the Noldor werebeloved of Aule, and he and his people came often among them. Great becametheir knowledge and their skill; yet even greater was their thirst for moreknowledge, and in many things they soon surpassed their teachers. They werechangeful in speech, for they had great love of words, and sought ever to findnames more fit for all things that they knew or imagined. And it came to passthat the masons of the house of Finwe, quarrying in the hills after stone (for theydelighted in the building of high towers), first discovered the earth-gems, andbrought them forth in countless myriads; and they devised tools for the cuttingand shaping of gems, and carved them in many forms. They hoarded them not,but gave them freely, and by their labour enriched all Valinor.
The Noldor afterwards came back to Middle-earth, and this tale tells mostly oftheir deeds; therefore the names and kinship of their princes may here be told, inthat form which these names later bore in the tongue of the Elves of Beleriand.
Finwe was King of the Noldor. The sons of Finwe were Feanor, and Fingolfin,and Finarfin; but the mother of Feanor was Miriel Serinde, whereas the motherof Fingolfin and Finarfin was Indis of the Vanyar.
Feanor was the mightiest in skill of word and of hand, more learned than hisbrothers; his spirit burned as a flame. Fingolfin was the strongest, the moststeadfast, and the most valiant. Finarfin was the fairest, and the most wise ofheart; and afterwards he was a friend of the sons of Olwe, lord of the Teleri, andhad to wife Earwen, the swan-maiden of Alqualonde, Olwe’s daughter.
The seven sons of Feanor were Maedhros the tall; Maglor the mighty singer,whose voice was heard far over land and sea; Celegorm the fair, and Caranthirthe dark; Curufin the crafty, who inherited most his father’s skill of hand; and theyoungest Amrod and Amras, who were twin brothers, alike in mood and face. Inlater days they were great hunters in the woods of Middle-earth; and a hunteralso was Celegorm, who in Valinor was a friend of Orome, and often followedthe Vala’s horn.
The sons of Fingolfin were Fingon, who was afterwards King of the Noldor inthe north of the world, and Turgon, lord of Gondolin; their sister was Aredhel theWhite. She was younger in the years of the Eldar than her brothers; and whenshe was grown to full stature and beauty she was tall and strong, and loved muchto ride and hunt in the forests. There she was often in the company of the sons ofFeanor, her kin; but to none was her heart’s love given. Ar-Feiniel she wascalled, the White Lady of the Noldor, for she was pale, though her hair was dark,and she was never arrayed but in silver and white.
The sons of Finarfin were Finrod the faithful (who was afterwards namedFelagund, Lord of Caves), Orodreth, Angrod, and Aegnor; these four were asclose in friendship with the sons of Fingolfin as though they were all brothers. Asister they had, Galadriel, most beautiful of all the house of Finwe; her hair waslit with gold as though it had caught in a mesh the radiance of Laurelin.
Here must be told how the Teleri came at last to the land of Aman. Through along age they dwelt in Tol Eressea; but slowly their hearts were changed, andwere drawn towards the light that flowed out over the sea to the Lonely Isle.They were torn between the love of the music of the waves upon their shores,and the desire to see again their kindred and to look upon the splendour ofValinor; but in the end desire of the light was the stronger. Therefore Ulmo,submitting to the will of the Valar, sent to them Osse, their friend, and he thoughgrieving taught them the craft of ship-building; and when their ships were builthe brought them as his parting gift many strong-winged swans. Then the swansdrew the white ships of the Teleri over the windless sea; and thus at last andlatest they came to Aman and the shores of Eldamar.
There they dwelt, and if they wished they could see the light of the Trees, andcould tread the golden streets of Valmar and the crystal stairs of Tirion uponTuna, the green hill; but most of all they sailed in their swift ships on the watersof the Bay of Elvenhome, or walked in the waves upon the shore with their hairgleaming in the light beyond the hill. Many jewels the Noldor gave them, opalsand diamonds and pale crystals, which they strewed upon the shores andscattered in the pools; marvellous were the beaches of Elende in those days. Andmany pearls they won for themselves from the sea, and their halls were of pearl,and of pearl were the mansions of Olwe at Alqualonde, the Haven of the Swans,lit with many lamps. For that was their city, and the haven of their ships; andthose were made in the likeness of swans, with beaks of gold and eyes of goldand jet. The gate of that harbour was an arch of living rock sea-carved; and it layupon the confines of Eldamar, north of the Calacirya, where the light of the starswas bright and clear.
As the ages passed the Vanyar grew to love the land of the Valar and the fulllight of the Trees, and they forsook the city of Tirion upon Tuna, and dweltthereafter upon the mountain of Manwe, or about the plains and woods ofValinor, and became sundered from the Noldor. But the memory of Middle-earthunder the stars remained in the hearts of the Noldor, and they abode in the
Calacirya, and in the hills and valleys within sound of the western sea; andthough many of them went often about the land of the Valar, making far journeysin search of the secrets of land and water and all living things, yet the peoples ofTuna and Alqualonde drew together in those days. Finwe was king in Tirion andOlwe in Alqualonde; but Ingwe was ever held the High King of all the Elves. Heabode thereafter at the feet of Manwe upon Taniquetil.
Feanor and his sons abode seldom in one place for long, but travelled far andwide upon the confines of Valinor, going even to the borders of the Dark and thecold shores of the Outer Sea, seeking the unknown. Often they were guests in thehalls of Aule; but Celegorm went rather to the house of Orome, and there he gotgreat knowledge of birds and beasts, and all their tongues he knew. For all livingthings that are or have been in the Kingdom of Arda, save only the fell and evilcreatures of Melkor, lived then in the land of Aman; and there also were manyother creatures that have not been seen upon Middle-earth, and perhaps nevernow shall be, since the fashion of the world was changed.
CHAPTER 6
OF FEANOR AND THE UNCHAINING OF MELKQR
Now the Three Kindreds of the Eldar were gathered at last in Valinor, andMelkor was chained. This was the Noontide of the Blessed Realm, the fullnessof its glory and its bliss, long in tale of years, but in memory too brief. In thosedays the Eldar became full-grown in stature of body and of mind, and the Noldoradvanced ever in skill and knowledge; and the long years were filled with theirjoyful labours, in which many new things fair and wonderful were devised. Thenit was that the Noldor first bethought them of letters, and Rumil of Tirion wasthe name of the loremaster who first achieved fitting signs for the recording ofspeech and song, some for graving upon metal or in stone, others for drawingwith brush or with pen.
In that time was born in Eldamar, in the house of the King in Tirion upon thecrown of Tuna, the eldest of the sons of Finwe, and the most beloved. Curufinwewas his name, but by his mother he was called Feanor, Spirit of Fire; and thus heis remembered in all the tales of the Noldor.
Miriel was the name of his mother, who was called Serinde, because of hersurpassing skill in weaving and needlework; for her hands were more skilled tofineness than any hands even among the Noldor. The love of Finwe and Mirielwas great and glad, for it began in the Blessed Realm in the Days of Bliss. But inthe bearing of her son Miriel was consumed in spirit and body; and after his birthshe yearned for release from the labour of living. And when she had named him,she said to Finwe: ‘Never again shall I bear child; for strength that would havenourished the life of many has gone forth into Feanor.’
Then Finwe was grieved, for the Noldor were in the youth of their days, andhe desired to bring forth many children into the bliss of Aman; and he said:‘Surely there is healing in Aman? Here all weariness can find rest.’ But whenMiriel languished still, Finwe sought the counsel of Manwe, and Manwedelivered her to the care of Irmo in Forien. At their parting (for a little while ashe thought) Finwe was sad, for it seemed an unhappy chance that the mothershould depart and miss the beginning at least of the childhood days of her son.
‘It is indeed unhappy,’ said Miriel, ‘and I would weep, if I were not so weary.But hold me blameless in this, and in all that may come after.’
She went then to the gardens of Forien and lay down to sleep; but though sheseemed to sleep, her spirit indeed departed from her body, and passed in silenceto the halls of Mandos. The maidens of Este tended the body of Miriel, and itremained unwithered; but she did not return. Then Finwe lived in sorrow; and hewent often to the gardens of Forien, and sitting beneath the silver willows beside
the body of his wife he called her by her names. But it was unavailing; and alonein all the Blessed Realm he was deprived of joy. After a while he went to Lorienno more.
All his love he gave thereafter to his son; and Feanor grew swiftly, as if asecret fire were kindled within him. He was tall, and fair of face, and masterful,his eyes piercingly bright and his hair raven-dark; in the pursuit of all hispurposes eager and steadfast. Few ever changed his courses by counsel, none byforce. He became of all the Noldor, then or after, the most subtle in mind and themost skilled in hand. In his youth, bettering the work of Rumil, he devised thoseletters which bear his name, and which the Eldar used ever after; and he it waswho, first of the Noldor, discovered how gems greater and brighter than those ofthe Earth might be made with skill. The first gems that Feanor made were whiteand colourless, but being set under starlight they would blaze with blue andsilver fires brighter than Helluin; and other crystals he made also, wherein thingsfar away could be seen small but clear, as with the eyes of the eagles of Manwe.Seldom were the hands and mind of Feanor at rest.
While still in his early youth he wedded Nerdanel, the daughter of a greatsmith named Mahtan, among those of the Noldor most dear to Aule; and ofMahtan he learned much of the making of things in metal and in stone. Nerdanelalso was firm of will, but more patient than Feanor, desiring to understand mindsrather than to master them, and at first she restrained him when the fire of hisheart grew too hot; but his later deeds grieved her, and they became estranged.Seven sons she bore to Feanor; her mood she bequeathed in part to some ofthem, but not to all.
Now it came to pass that Finwe took as his second wife Indis the Fair. Shewas a Vanya, close kin of Ingwe the High King, golden-haired and tall, and in allways unlike Miriel. Finwe loved her greatly, and was glad again. But the shadowof Miriel did not depart from the house of Finwe, nor from his heart; and of allwhom he loved Feanor had ever the chief share of his thought.
The wedding of his father was not pleasing to Feanor; and he had no greatlove for Indis, nor for Fingolfin and Finarfin, her sons. He lived apart from them,exploring the land of Aman, or busying himself with the knowledge and thecrafts in which he delighted. In those unhappy things which later came to pass,and in which Feanor was the leader, many saw the effect of this breach withinthe house of Finwe, judging that if Finwe had endured his loss and been contentwith the fathering of his mighty son, the courses of Feanor would have beenotherwise, and great evil might have been prevented; for the sorrow and thestrife in the house of Finwe is graven in the memory of the Noldorin Elves. Butthe children of Indis were great and glorious, and their children also; and if they
had not lived the history of the Eldar would have been diminished.
Now even while Feanor and the craftsmen of the Noldor worked with delight,foreseeing no end to their labours, and while the sons of Indis grew to their fullstature, the Noontide of Valinor was drawing to its close. For it came to pass thatMelkor, as the Valar had decreed, completed the term of his bondage, dwellingfor three ages in the duress of Mandos, alone. At length, as Manwe hadpromised, he was brought again before the thrones of the Valar. Then he lookedupon their glory and their bliss, and envy was in his heart; he looked upon theChildren of Iluvatar that sat at the feet of the Mighty, and hatred filled him; helooked upon the wealth of bright gems, and he lusted for them; but he hid histhoughts, and postponed his vengeance.
Before the gates of Valmar Melkor abased himself at the feet of Manwe andsued for pardon, vowing that if he might be made only the least of the freepeople of Valinor he would aid the Valar in all their works, and most of all in thehealing of the many hurts that he had done to the world. And Nienna aided hisprayer; but Mandos was silent.
Then Manwe granted him pardon; but the Valar would not yet suffer him todepart beyond their sight and vigilance, and he was constrained to dwell withinthe gates of Valmar. But fair-seeming were all the words and deeds of Melkor inthat time, and both the Valar and the Eldar had profit from his aid and counsel, ifthey sought it; and therefore in a while he was given leave to go freely about theland, and it seemed to Manwe that the evil of Melkor was cured. For Manwe wasfree from evil and could not comprehend it, and he knew that in the beginning,in the thought of Iluvatar, Melkor had been even as he; and he saw not to thedepths of Melkor’s heart, and did not perceive that all love had departed fromhim for ever. But Ulmo was not deceived, and Tulkas clenched his handswhenever he saw Melkor his foe go by; for if Tulkas is slow to wrath he is slowalso to forget. But they obeyed the judgement of Manwe; for those who willdefend authority against rebellion must not themselves rebel.
Now in his heart Melkor most hated the Eldar, both because they were fair andjoyful and because in them he saw the reason for the arising of the Valar, and hisown downfall. Therefore all the more did he feign love for them and seek theirfriendship, and he offered them the service of his lore and labour in any greatdeed that they would do. The Vanyar indeed held him in suspicion, for theydwelt in the light of the Trees and were content; and to the Teleri he gave smallheed, thinking them of little worth, tools too weak for his designs. But theNoldor took delight in the hidden knowledge that he could reveal to them; and
some hearkened to words that it would have been better for them never to haveheard. Melkor indeed declared afterwards that Feanor had learned much art fromhim in secret, and had been instructed by him in the greatest of all his works; buthe lied in his lust and his envy, for none of the Eldalie ever hated Melkor morethan Feanor son of Finwe, who first named him Morgoth; and snared though hewas in the webs of Melkor’s malice against the Valar he held no converse withhim and took no counsel from him. For Feanor was driven by the fire of his ownheart only, working ever swiftly and alone; and he asked the aid and sought thecounsel of none that dwelt in Aman, great or small, save only and for a littlewhile of Nerdanel the wise, his wife.
CHAPTER 7
OF THE SILMARILS AND THE UNREST OF THE NOLDOR
In that time were made those things that afterwards were most renowned of allthe works of the Elves. For Feanor, being come to his full might, was filled witha new thought, or it may be that some shadow of foreknowledge came to him ofthe doom that drew near; and he pondered how the light of the Trees, the gloryof the Blessed Realm, might be preserved imperishable. Then he began a longand secret labour, and he summoned all his lore, and his power, and his subtleskill; and at the end of all he made the Silmarils.
As three great jewels they were in form. But not until the End, when Feanorshall return who perished ere the Sun was made, and sits now in the Halls ofAwaiting and comes no more among his kin; not until the Sun passes and theMoon falls, shall it be known of what substance they were made. Tike the crystalof diamonds it appeared, and yet was more strong than adamant, so that noviolence could mar it or break it within the Kingdom of Arda. Yet that crystalwas to the Silmarils but as is the body to the Children of Iluvatar: the house of itsinner fire, that is within it and yet in all parts of it, and is its life. And the innerfire of the Silmarils Feanor made of the blended light of the Trees of Valinor,which lives in them yet, though the Trees have long withered and shine no more.Therefore even in the darkness of the deepest treasury the Silmarils of their ownradiance shone like the stars of Varda; and yet, as were they indeed living things,they rejoiced in light and received it and gave it back in hues more marvellousthan before.
All who dwelt in Aman were filled with wonder and delight at the work ofFeanor. And Varda hallowed the Silmarils, so that thereafter no mortal flesh, norhands unclean, nor anything of evil will might touch them, but it was scorchedand withered; and Mandos foretold that the fates of Arda, earth, sea, and air, laylocked within them. The heart of Feanor was fast bound to these things that hehimself had made.
Then Melkor lusted for the Silmarils, and the very memory of their radiancewas a gnawing fire in his heart. From that time forth, inflamed by this desire, hesought ever more eagerly how he should destroy Feanor and end the friendshipof the Valar and the Elves; but he dissembled his purposes with cunning, andnothing of his malice could yet be seen in the semblance that he wore. Fong washe at work, and slow at first and barren was his labour. But he that sows lies inthe end shall not lack of a harvest, and soon he may rest from toil indeed whileothers reap and sow in his stead. Ever Melkor found some ears that would heedhim, and some tongues that would enlarge what they had heard; and his lies
passed from friend to friend, as secrets of which the knowledge proves the tellerwise. Bitterly did the Noldor atone for the folly of their open ears in the days thatfollowed after.
When he saw that many leaned towards him, Melkor would often walk amongthem, and amid his fair words others were woven, so subtly that many who heardthem believed in recollection that they arose from their own thought. Visions hewould conjure in their hearts of the mighty realms that they could have ruled attheir own will, in power and freedom in the East; and then whispers went abroadthat the Valar had brought the Eldar to Aman because of their jealousy, fearingthat the beauty of the Quendi and the makers’ power that Iluvatar hadbequeathed to them would grow too great for the Valar to govern, as the Elveswaxed and spread over the wide lands of the world.
In those days, moreover, though the Valar knew indeed of the coming of Menthat were to be, the Elves as yet knew naught of it; for Manwe had not revealedit to them. But Melkor spoke to them in secret of Mortal Men, seeing how thesilence of the Valar might be twisted to evil. Little he knew yet concerning Men,for engrossed with his own thought in the Music he had paid small heed to theThird Theme of Iluvatar; but now the whisper went among the Elves that Manweheld them captive, so that Men might come and supplant them in the kingdomsof Middle-earth, for the Valar saw that they might more easily sway this short¬lived and weaker race, defrauding the Elves of the inheritance of Iluvatar. Smalltruth was there in this, and little have the Valar ever prevailed to sway the willsof Men; but many of the Noldor believed, or half believed, the evil words.
Thus ere the Valar were aware, the peace of Valinor was poisoned. The Noldorbegan to murmur against them, and many became filled with pride, forgettinghow much of what they had and knew came to them in gift from the Valar.Fiercest burned the new flame of desire for freedom and wider realms in theeager heart of Feanor; and Melkor laughed in his secrecy, for to that mark hislies had been addressed, hating Feanor above all, and lusting ever for theSilmarils. But these he was not suffered to approach; for though at great feastsFeanor would wear them, blazing on his brow, at other times they were guardedclose, locked in the deep chambers of his hoard in Tirion. For Feanor began tolove the Silmarils with a greedy love, and grudged the sight of them to all saveto his father and his seven sons; he seldom remembered now that the light withinthem was not his own.
High princes were Feanor and Fingolfin, the elder sons of Finwe, honoured byall in Aman; but now they grew proud and jealous each of his rights and hispossessions. Then Melkor set new lies abroad in Eldamar, and whispers came toFeanor that Fingolfin and his sons were plotting to usurp the leadership of Finwe
and of the elder line of Feanor, and to supplant them by the leave of the Valar;for the Valar were ill-pleased that the Silmarils lay in Tirion and were notcommitted to their keeping. But to Fingolfin and Finarfin it was said: ‘Beware!Small love has the proud son of Miriel ever had for the children of Indis. Now hehas become great, and he has his father in his hand. It will not be long before hedrives you forth from Tuna!’
And when Melkor saw that these lies were smouldering, and that pride andanger were awake among the Noldor, he spoke to them concerning weapons; andin that time the Noldor began the smithying of swords and axes and spears.Shields also they made displaying the tokens of many houses and kindreds thatvied one with another; and these only they wore abroad, and of other weaponsthey did not speak, for each believed that he alone had received the warning.And Feanor made a secret forge, of which not even Melkor was aware; and therehe tempered fell swords for himself and for his sons, and made tall helms withplumes of red. Bitterly did Mahtan rue the day when he taught to the husband ofNerdanel all the lore of metalwork that he had learned of Aule.
Thus with lies and evil whisperings and false counsel Melkor kindled thehearts of the Noldor to strife; and of their quarrels came at length the end of thehigh days of Valinor and the evening of its ancient glory. For Feanor now beganopenly to speak words of rebellion against the Valar, crying aloud that he woulddepart from Valinor back to the world without, and would deliver the Noldorfrom thraldom, if they would follow him.
Then there was great unrest in Tirion, and Finwe was troubled; and hesummoned all his lords to council. But Fingolfin hastened to his halls and stoodbefore him, saying: ‘King and father, wilt thou not restrain the pride of ourbrother, Curufinwe, who is called the Spirit of Fire, all too truly? By what rightdoes he speak for all our people, as if he were King? Thou it was who long agospoke before the Quendi, bidding them accept the summons of the Valar toAman. Thou it was that led the Noldor upon the long road through the perils ofMiddle-earth to the light of Eldamar. If thou dost not now repent of it, two sonsat least thou hast to honour thy words?
But even as Fingolfin spoke, Feanor strode into the chamber, and he was fullyarmed: his high helm upon his head, and at his side a mighty sword. ‘So it is,even as I guessed? he said. ‘My half-brother would be before me with my father,in this as in all other matters? Then turning upon Fingolfin he drew his sword,crying: ‘Get thee gone, and take thy due place!’
Fingolfin bowed before Finwe, and without word or glance to Feanor he wentfrom the chamber. But Feanor followed him, and at the door of the king’s househe stayed him; and the point of his bright sword he set against Fingolfin’s breast.
‘See, half-brother!’ he said. ‘This is sharper than thy tongue. Try but once moreto usurp my place and the love of my father, and maybe it will rid the Noldor ofone who seeks to be the master of thralls.’
These words were heard by many, for the house of Finwe was in the greatsquare beneath the Mindon; but again Fingolfin made no answer, and passingthrough the throng in silence he went to seek Finarfin his brother.
Now the unrest of the Noldor was not indeed hidden from the Valar, but itsseed had been sown in the dark; and therefore, since Feanor first spoke openlyagainst them, they judged that he was the mover of discontent, being eminent inself-will and arrogance, though all the Noldor had become proud. And Manwewas grieved, but he watched and said no word. The Valar had brought the Eldarto their land freely, to dwell or to depart; and though they might judge departureto be folly, they might not restrain them from it. But now the deeds of Feanorcould not be passed over, and the Valar were angered and dismayed; and he wassummoned to appear before them at the gates of Valmar, to answer for all hiswords and deeds. There also were summoned all others who had any part in thismatter, or any knowledge of it; and Feanor standing before Mandos in the Ringof Doom was commanded to answer all that was asked of him. Then at last theroot was laid bare, and the malice of Melkor revealed; and straightway Tulkasleft the council to lay hands upon him and bring him again to judgement. ButFeanor was not held guiltless, for he it was that had broken the peace of Valinorand drawn his sword upon his kinsman; and Mandos said to him: ‘Thou speakestof thraldom. If thraldom it be, thou canst not escape it: for Manwe is King ofArda, and not of Aman only. And this deed was unlawful, whether in Aman ornot in Aman. Therefore this doom is now made: for twelve years thou shalt leaveTirion where this threat was uttered. In that time take counsel with thyself, andremember who and what thou art. But after that time this matter shall be set inpeace and held redressed, if others will release thee.’
Then Fingolfin said: ‘I will release my brother.’ But Feanor spoke no word inanswer, standing silent before the Valar. Then he turned and left the council, anddeparted from Valmar.
With him into banishment went his seven sons, and northward in Valinor theymade a strong place and treasury in the hills; and there at Formenos a multitudeof gems were laid in hoard, and weapons also, and the Silmarils were shut in achamber of iron. Thither also came Finwe the King, because of the love that hebore to Feanor; and Fingolfin ruled the Noldor in Tirion. Thus the lies of Melkorwere made true in seeming, though Feanor by his own deeds had brought thisthing to pass; and the bitterness that Melkor had sown endured, and lived stilllong afterwards between the sons of Fingolfin and Feanor.
Now Melkor, knowing that his devices had been revealed, hid himself andpassed from place to place as a cloud in the hills; and Tulkas sought for him invain. Then it seemed to the people of Valinor that the light of the Trees wasdimmed, and the shadows of all standing things grew longer and darker in thattime.
It is told that for a time Melkor was not seen again in Valinor, nor was anyrumour heard of him, until suddenly he came to Formenos, and spoke withFeanor before his doors. Friendship he feigned with cunning argument, urginghim to his former thought of flight from the trammels of the Valar; and he said:‘Behold the truth of all that I have spoken, and how thou art banished unjustly.But if the heart of Feanor is yet free and bold as were his words in Tirion, then Iwill aid him, and bring him far from this narrow land. For am I not Vala also?Yea, and more than those who sit in pride in Valimar; and I have ever been afriend to the Noldor, most skilled and most valiant of the people of Arda.’
Now Feanor’s heart was still bitter at his humiliation before Mandos, and helooked at Melkor in silence, pondering if indeed he might yet trust him so far asto aid him in his flight. And Melkor, seeing that Feanor wavered, and knowingthat the Silmarils held his heart in thrall, said at the last: ‘Here is a strong place,and well guarded; but think not that the Silmarils will lie safe in any treasurywithin the realm of the Valar! ’
But his cunning overreached his aim; his words touched too deep, and awokea fire more fierce than he designed; and Feanor looked upon Melkor with eyesthat burned through his fair semblance and pierced the cloaks of his mind,perceiving there his fierce lust for the Silmarils. Then hate overcame Feanor’sfear, and he cursed Melkor and bade him be gone, saying: ‘Get thee gone frommy gate, thou jail-crow of Mandos!’ And he shut the doors of his house in theface of the mightiest of all the dwellers in Ea.
Then Melkor departed in shame, for he was himself in peril, and he saw nothis time yet for revenge; but his heart was black with anger. And Finwe wasfilled with great fear, and in haste he sent messengers to Manwe in Valmar.
Now the Valar were sitting in council before their gates, fearing thelengthening of the shadows, when the messengers came from Formenos. At onceOrome and Tulkas sprang up, but even as they set out in pursuit messengerscame from Eldamar, telling that Melkor had fled through the Calacirya, and fromthe hill of Tuna the Elves had seen him pass in wrath as a thundercloud. Andthey said that thence he had turned northward, for the Teleri in Alqualonde hadseen his shadow going by their haven towards Araman.
Thus Melkor departed from Valinor, and for a while the Two Trees shoneagain unshadowed, and the land was filled with light. But the Valar sought in
vain for tidings of their enemy; and as a cloud far off that looms ever higher,borne upon a slow cold wind, a doubt now marred the joy of all the dwellers inAman, dreading they knew not what evil that yet might come.
CHAPTER 8
OF THE DARKENING OF VALINOR
When Manwe heard of the ways that Melkor had taken, it seemed plain to himthat he purposed to escape to his old strongholds in the north of Middle-earth;and Orome and Tulkas went with all speed northward, seeking to overtake him ifthey might, but they found no trace or rumour of him beyond the shores of theTeleri, in the unpeopled wastes that drew near to the Ice. Thereafter the watchwas redoubled along the northern fences of Aman; but to no purpose, for ereever the pursuit set out Melkor had turned back, and in secrecy passed away farto the south. For he was yet as one of the Valar, and could change his form, orwalk unclad, as could his brethren; though that power he was soon to lose forever.
Thus unseen he came at last to the dark region of Avathar. That narrow landlay south of the Bay of Eldamar, beneath the eastern feet of the Pelori, and itslong and mournful shores stretched away into the south, lightless andunexplored. There, beneath the sheer walls of the mountains and the cold darksea, the shadows were deepest and thickest in the world; and there in Avathar,secret and unknown, Ungoliant had made her abode. The Eldar knew not whenceshe came; but some have said that in ages long before she descended from thedarkness that lies about Arda, when Melkor first looked down in envy upon theKingdom of Manwe, and that in the beginning she was one of those that hecorrupted to his service. But she had disowned her Master, desiring to bemistress of her own lust, taking all things to herself to feed her emptiness; andshe fled to the south, escaping the assaults of the Valar and the hunters ofOrome, for their vigilance had ever been to the north, and the south was longunheeded. Thence she had crept towards the light of the Blessed Realm; for shehungered for light and hated it.
In a ravine she lived, and took shape as a spider of monstrous form, weavingher black webs in a cleft of the mountains. There she sucked up all light that shecould find, and spun it forth again in dark nets of strangling gloom, until no lightmore could come to her abode; and she was famished.
Now Melkor came to Avathar and sought her out; and he put on again theform that he had worn as the tyrant of Utumno: a dark Lord, tall and terrible. Inthat form he remained ever after. There in the black shadows, beyond the sighteven of Manwe in his highest halls, Melkor with Ungoliant plotted his revenge.But when Ungoliant understood the purpose of Melkor, she was torn betweenlust and great fear; for she was loath to dare the perils of Aman and the power ofthe dreadful Lords, and she would not stir from her hiding. Therefore Melkor
said to her: ‘Do as I bid; and if thou hunger still when all is done, then I will givethee whatsoever thy lust may demand. Yea, with both hands . 5 Lightly he madethis vow, as he ever did; and he laughed in his heart. Thus did the great thief sethis lure for the lesser.
A cloak of darkness she wove about them when Melkor and Ungoliant setforth: an Unlight, in which things seemed to be no more, and which eyes couldnot pierce, for it was void. Then slowly she wrought her webs: rope by ropefrom cleft to cleft, from jutting rock to pinnacle of stone, ever climbing upwards,crawling and clinging, until at last she reached the very summit of Hyarmentir,the highest mountain in that region of the world, far south of great Taniquetil.There the Valar were not vigilant; for west of the Pelori was an empty land intwilight, and eastward the mountains looked out, save for forgotten Avathar, onlyupon the dim waters of the pathless sea.
But now upon the mountain-top dark Ungoliant lay; and she made a ladder ofwoven ropes and cast it down, and Melkor climbed upon it and came to that highplace, and stood beside her, looking down upon the Guarded Realm. Below themlay the woods of Orome, and westward shimmered the fields and pastures ofYavanna, gold beneath the tall wheat of the gods. But Melkor looked north, andsaw afar the shining plain, and the silver domes of Valmar gleaming in themingling of the lights of Telperion and Laurelin. Then Melkor laughed aloud,and leapt swiftly down the long western slopes; and Ungoliant was at his side,and her darkness covered them.
Now it was a time of festival, as Melkor knew well. Though all tides andseasons were at the will of the Valar, and in Valinor there was no winter of death,nonetheless they dwelt then in the Kingdom of Arda, and that was but a smallrealm in the halls of Ea, whose life is Time, which flows ever from the first noteto the last chord of Eru. And even as it was then the delight of the Valar (as istold in the Ainulindale) to clothe themselves as in a vesture in the forms of theChildren of Iluvatar, so also did they eat and drink, and gather the fruits ofYavanna from the Earth, which under Eru they had made.
Therefore Yavanna set times for the flowering and the ripening of all thingsthat grew in Valinor; and at each first gathering of fruits Manwe made a highfeast for the praising of Eru, when all the peoples of Valinor poured forth theirjoy in music and song upon Taniquetil. This now was the hour, and Manwedecreed a feast more glorious than any that had been held since the coming ofthe Eldar to Aman. For though the escape of Melkor portended toils and sorrowsto come, and indeed none could tell what further hurts would be done to Ardaere he could be subdued again, at this time Manwe designed to heal the evil thathad arisen among the Noldor; and all were bidden to come to his halls upon
Taniquetil, there to put aside the griefs that lay between their princes, and forgetutterly the lies of their Enemy.
There came the Vanyar, and there came the Noldor of Tirion, and the Maiarwere gathered together, and the Valar were arrayed in their beauty and majesty;and they sang before Manwe and Varda in their lofty halls, or danced upon thegreen slopes of the Mountain that looked west towards the Trees. In that day thestreets of Valmar were empty, and the stairs of Tirion were silent; and all the landlay sleeping in peace. Only the Teleri beyond the mountains still sang upon theshores of the sea; for they recked little of seasons or times, and gave no thoughtto the cares of the Rulers of Arda, or the shadow that had fallen on Valinor, for ithad not touched them, as yet.
One thing only marred the design of Manwe.Feanor came indeed, for himalone Manwe had commanded to come; but Finwe came not, nor any others ofthe Noldor of Formenos. For said Finwe: 'While the ban lasts upon Feanor myson, that he may not go to Tirion, I hold myself unkinged, and I will not meet mypeople.’ And Feanor came not in raiment of festival, and he wore no ornament,neither silver nor gold nor any gem; and he denied the sight of the Silmarils tothe Valar and the Eldar, and left them locked in Formenos in their chamber ofiron. Nevertheless he met Fingolfin before the throne of Manwe, and wasreconciled, in word; and Fingolfin set at naught the unsheathing of the sword.For Fingolfin held forth his hand, saying: ‘As I promised, I do now. I releasethee, and remember no grievance.’
Then Feanor took his hand in silence; but Fingolfin said: ‘Half-brother inblood, full brother in heart will I be. Thou shalt lead and I will follow. May nonew grief divide us.’
‘I hear thee,’ said Feanor. ‘So be it.’ But they did not know the meaning thattheir words would bear.
It is told that even as Feanor and Fingolfin stood before Manwe there camethe mingling of the lights, when both Trees were shining, and the silent city ofValmar was filled with a radiance of silver and gold. And in that very hourMelkor and Ungoliant came hastening over the fields of Valinor, as the shadowof a black cloud upon the wind fleets over the sunlit earth; and they came beforethe green mound Ezellohar. Then the Unlight of Ungoliant rose up even to theroots of the Trees, and Melkor sprang upon the mound; and with his black spearhe smote each Tree to its core, wounded them deep, and their sap poured forth asit were their blood, and was spilled upon the ground. But Ungoliant sucked it up,and going then from Tree to Tree she set her black beak to their wounds, till theywere drained; and the poison of Death that was in her went into their tissues andwithered them, root, branch, and leaf; and they died. And still she thirsted, and
going to the Wells of Varda she drank them dry; but Ungoliant belched forthblack vapours as she drank, and swelled to a shape so vast and hideous thatMelkor was afraid.
So the great darkness fell upon Valinor. Of the deeds of that day much is toldin the Aldudenie, that Elemmire of the Vanyar made and is known to all theEldar. Yet no song or tale could contain all the grief and terror that then befell.The Light failed; but the Darkness that followed was more than loss of light. Inthat hour was made a Darkness that seemed not lack but a thing with being of itsown: for it was indeed made by malice out of Light, and it had power to piercethe eye, and to enter heart and mind, and strangle the very will.
Varda looked down from Taniquetil, and beheld the Shadow soaring up insudden towers of gloom; Valmar had foundered in a deep sea of night. Soon theHoly Mountain stood alone, a last island in a world that was drowned. All songceased. There was silence in Valinor, and no sound could be heard, save onlyfrom afar there came on the wind through the pass of the mountains the wailingof the Teleri like the cold cry of gulls. For it blew chill from the East in that hour,and the vast shadows of the sea were rolled against the walls of the shore.
But Manwe from his high seat looked out, and his eyes alone pierced throughthe night, until they saw a Darkness beyond dark which they could not penetrate,huge but far away, moving now northward with great speed; and he knew thatMelkor had come and gone.
Then the pursuit was begun; and the earth shook beneath the horses of the hostof Orome, and the fire that was stricken from the hooves of Nahar was the firstlight that returned to Valinor. But so soon as any came up with the Cloud ofUngoliant the riders of the Valar were blinded and dismayed, and they werescattered, and went they knew not whither; and the sound of the Valaromafaltered and failed. And Tulkas was as one caught in a black net at night, and hestood powerless and beat the air in vain. But when the Darkness had passed, itwas too late: Melkor had gone whither he would, and his vengeance wasachieved.
CHAPTER 9
OF THE FLIGHT OF THE NOLDOR
After a time a great concourse gathered about the Ring of Doom; and the Valarsat in shadow, for it was night. But the stars of Varda now glimmered overhead,and the air was clear; for the winds of Manwe had driven away the vapours ofdeath and rolled back the shadows of the sea. Then Yavanna arose and stoodupon Ezellohar, the Green Mound, but it was bare now and black; and she laidher hands upon the Trees, but they were dead and dark, and each branch that shetouched broke and fell lifeless at her feet. Then many voices were lifted inlamentation; and it seemed to those that mourned that they had drained to thedregs the cup of woe that Melkor had filled for them. But it was not so.
Yavanna spoke before the Valar, saying: ‘The Light of the Trees has passedaway, and lives now only in the Silmarils of Feanor. Foresighted was he! Evenfor those who are mightiest under Iluvatar there is some work that they mayaccomplish once, and once only. The Light of the Trees I brought into being, andwithin Ea I can do so never again. Yet had I but a little of that light I could recalllife to the Trees, ere their roots decay; and then our hurt should be healed, andthe malice of Melkor be confounded.’
Then Manwe spoke and said: ‘Hearest thou, Feanor son of Finwe, the wordsof Yavanna? Wilt thou grant what she would ask?’
There was long silence, but Feanor answered no word. Then Tulkas cried:‘Speak, O Noldo, yea or nay! But who shall deny Yavanna? And did not the lightof the Silmarils come from her work in the beginning?’
But Aule the Maker said: ‘Be not hasty! We ask a greater thing than thouknowest. Let him have peace yet awhile.’
But Feanor spoke then, and cried bitterly: ‘For the less even as for the greaterthere is some deed that he may accomplish but once only; and in that deed hisheart shall rest. It may be that I can unlock my jewels, but never again shall Imake their like; and if I must break them, I shall break my heart, and I shall beslain; first of all the Eldar in Aman.’
‘Not the first,’ said Mandos, but they did not understand his word; and againthere was silence, while Feanor brooded in the dark. It seemed to him that hewas beset in a ring of enemies, and the words of Melkor returned to him, sayingthat the Silmarils were not safe, if the Valar would possess them. ‘And is he notVala as are they,’ said his thought, ‘and does he not understand their hearts? Yea,a thief shall reveal thieves!’ Then he cried aloud: ‘This thing I will not do of freewill. But if the Valar will constrain me, then shall I know indeed that Melkor isof their kindred.’
Then Mandos said: Thou hast spoken.’ And Nienna arose and went up ontoEzellohar, and cast back her grey hood, and with her tears washed away thedefilements of Ungoliant; and she sang in mourning for the bitterness of theworld and the Marring of Arda.
But even as Nienna mourned, there came messengers from Formenos, andthey were Noldor and bore new tidings of evil. For they told how a blindDarkness came northward, and in the midst walked some power for which therewas no name, and the Darkness issued from it. But Melkor also was there, andhe came to the house of Feanor, and there he slew Finwe King of the Noldorbefore his doors, and spilled the first blood in the Blessed Realm; for Finwealone had not fled from the horror of the Dark. And they told that Melkor hadbroken the stronghold of Formenos, and taken all the jewels of the Noldor thatwere hoarded in that place; and the Silmarils were gone.
Then Feanor rose, and lifting up his hand before Manwe he cursed Melkor,naming him Morgoth, the Black Foe of the World; and by that name only was heknown to the Eldar ever after. And he cursed also the summons of Manwe andthe hour in which he came to Taniquetil, thinking in the madness of his rage andgrief that had he been at Formenos his strength would have availed more than tobe slain also, as Melkor had purposed. Then Feanor ran from the Ring of Doom,and fled into the night; for his father was dearer to him than the Fight of Valinoror the peerless works of his hands; and who among sons, of Elves or of Men,have held their fathers of greater worth?
Many there grieved for the anguish of Feanor, but his loss was not his alone;and Yavanna wept by the mound, in fear that the Darkness should swallow thelast rays of the Fight of Valinor for ever. For though the Valar did not yetunderstand fully what had befallen, they perceived that Melkor had called uponsome aid that came from beyond Arda. The Silmarils had passed away, and allone it may seem whether Feanor had said yea or nay to Yavanna; yet had he saidyea at the first, before the tidings came from Formenos, it may be that his afterdeeds would have been other than they were. But now the doom of the Noldordrew near.
Meanwhile Morgoth escaping from the pursuit of the Valar came to the wastesof Araman. This land lay northward between the Mountains of the Pelori and theGreat Sea, as Avathar lay to the south; but Araman was a wider land, andbetween the shores and the mountains were barren plains, ever colder as the Icedrew nearer. Through this region Morgoth and Ungoliant passed in haste, and socame through the great mists of Oiomure to the Helcaraxe, where the straitbetween Araman and Middle-earth was filled with grinding ice; and he crossedover, and came back at last to the north of the Outer Fands. Together they went
on, for Morgoth could not elude Ungoliant, and her cloud was still about him,and all her eyes were upon him; and they came to those lands that lay north ofthe Firth of Drengist. Now Morgoth was drawing near to the ruins of Angband,where his great western stronghold had been; and Ungoliant perceived his hope,and knew that here he would seek to escape from her, and she stayed him,demanding that he fulfil his promise.
‘Blackheart!’ she said. ‘I have done thy bidding. But I hunger still.’
‘What wouldst thou have more?’ said Morgoth. ‘Dost thou desire all the worldfor thy belly? I did not vow to give thee that. I am its Lord.’
‘Not so much,’ said Ungoliant. ‘But thou hast a great treasure from Formenos;I will have all that. Yea, with both hands thou shalt give it.’
Then perforce Morgoth surrendered to her the gems that he bore with him, oneby one and grudgingly; and she devoured them, and their beauty perished fromthe world. Huger and darker yet grew Ungoliant, but her lust was unsated. ‘Withone hand thou givest,’ she said; ‘with the left only. Open thy right hand.’
In his right hand Morgoth held close the Silmarils, and though they werelocked in a crystal casket, they had begun to burn him, and his hand wasclenched in pain; but he would not open it. ‘Nay!’ he said. ‘Thou hast had thydue. For with my power that I put into thee thy work was accomplished. I needthee no more. These things thou shalt not have, nor see. I name them unto myselffor ever.’
But Ungoliant had grown great, and he less by the power that had gone out ofhim; and she rose against him, and her cloud closed about him, and sheenmeshed him in a web of clinging thongs to strangle him. Then Morgoth sentforth a terrible cry, that echoed in the mountains. Therefore that region wascalled Lammoth; for the echoes of his voice dwelt there ever after, so that anywho cried aloud in that land awoke them, and all the waste between the hills andthe sea was filled with a clamour as of voices in anguish. The cry of Morgoth inthat hour was the greatest and most dreadful that was ever heard in the northernworld; the mountains shook, and the earth trembled, and rocks were rivenasunder. Deep in forgotten places that cry was heard. Far beneath the ruined hallsof Angband, in vaults to which the Valar in the haste of their assault had notdescended, Balrogs lurked still, awaiting ever the return of their Lord; and nowswiftly they arose, and passing over Hithlum they came to Lammoth as atempest of fire. With their whips of flame they smote asunder the webs ofUngoliant, and she quailed, and turned to flight, belching black vapours to coverher; and fleeing from the north she went down into Beleriand, and dwelt beneathEred Gorgoroth, in that dark valley that was after called Nan Dungortheb, theValley of Dreadful Death, because of the horror that she bred there. For other
foul creatures of spider form had dwelt there since the days of the delving ofAngband, and she mated with them, and devoured them; and even afterUngoliant herself departed, and went whither she would into the forgotten southof the world, her offspring abode there and wove their hideous webs. Of the fateof Ungoliant no tale tells. Yet some have said that she ended long ago, when inher uttermost famine she devoured herself at last.
And thus the fear of Yavanna that the Silmarils would be swallowed up andfall into nothingness did not come to pass; but they remained in the power ofMorgoth. And he being freed gathered again all his servants that he could find,and came to the ruins of Angband. There he delved anew his vast vaults anddungeons, and above their gates he reared the threefold peaks of Thangorodrim,and a great reek of dark smoke was ever wreathed about them. There countlessbecame the hosts of his beasts and his demons, and the race of the Ores, bredlong before, grew and multiplied in the bowels of the earth. Dark now fell theshadow on Beleriand, as is told hereafter; but in Angband Morgoth forged forhimself a great crown of iron, and he called himself King of the World. In tokenof this he set the Silmarils in his crown. His hands were burned black by thetouch of those hallowed jewels, and black they remained ever after; nor was heever free from the pain of the burning, and the anger of the pain. That crown henever took from his head, though its weight became a deadly weariness. Neverbut once only did he depart for a while secretly from his domain in the North;seldom indeed did he leave the deep places of his fortress, but governed hisarmies from his northern throne. And once only also did he himself wieldweapon, while his realm lasted.
For now, more than in the days of Utumno ere his pride was humbled, hishatred devoured him, and in the domination of his servants and the inspiring ofthem with lust of evil he spent his spirit. Nonetheless his majesty as one of theValar long remained, though turned to terror, and before his face all save themightiest sank into a dark pit of fear.
Now when it was known that Morgoth had escaped from Valinor and pursuitwas unavailing, the Valar remained long seated in darkness in the Ring of Doom,and the Maiar and the Vanyar stood beside them and wept; but the Noldor for themost part returned to Tirion and mourned for the darkening of their fair city.Through the dim ravine of the Calacirya fogs drifted in from the shadowy seasand mantled its towers, and the lamp of the Mindon burned pale in the gloom.
Then suddenly Feanor appeared in the city and called on all to come to thehigh court of the King upon the summit of Tuna; but the doom of banishment
that had been laid upon him was not yet lifted, and he rebelled against the Valar.A great multitude gathered swiftly, therefore, to hear what he would say; and thehill and all the stairs and streets that climbed upon it were lit with the light ofmany torches that each one bore in hand. Feanor was a master of words, and histongue had great power over hearts when he would use it; and that night he madea speech before the Noldor which they ever remembered. Fierce and fell werehis words, and filled with anger and pride; and hearing them the Noldor werestirred to madness. His wrath and his hate were given most to Morgoth, and yetwell nigh all that he said came from the very lies of Morgoth himself; but he wasdistraught with grief for the slaying of his father, and with anguish for the rape ofthe Silmarils. He claimed now the kingship of all the Noldor, since Finwe wasdead, and he scorned the decrees of the Valar.
‘Why, O people of the Noldor,’ he cried, ‘why should we longer serve thejealous Valar, who cannot keep us nor even their own realm secure from theirEnemy? And though he be now their foe, are not they and he of one kin?Vengeance calls me hence, but even were it otherwise I would not dwell longerin the same land with the kin of my father’s slayer and of the thief of mytreasure. Yet I am not the only valiant in this valiant people. And have ye not alllost your King? And what else have ye not lost, cooped here in a narrow landbetween the mountains and the sea?
‘Here once was light, that the Valar begrudged to Middle-earth, but now darklevels all. Shall we mourn here deedless for ever, a shadow-folk, mist-haunting,dropping vain tears in the thankless sea? Or shall we return to our home? InCuivienen sweet ran the waters under unclouded stars, and wide lands lay about,where a free people might walk. There they lie still and await us who in our follyforsook them. Come away! Let the cowards keep this city!’
Long he spoke, and ever he urged the Noldor to follow him and by their ownprowess to win freedom and great realms in the lands of the East, before it wastoo late; for he echoed the lies of Melkor, that the Valar had cozened them andwould hold them captive so that Men might rule in Middle-earth. Many of theEldar heard then for the first time of the Aftercomers. ‘Fair shall the end be,’ hecried, ‘though long and hard shall be the road! Say farewell to bondage! But sayfarewell also to ease! Say farewell to the weak! Say farewell to your treasures!More still shall we make. Journey light: but bring with you your swords! For wewill go further than Orome, endure longer than Tulkas: we will never turn backfrom pursuit. After Morgoth to the ends of the Earth! War shall he have andhatred undying. But when we have conquered and have regained the Silmarils,then we and we alone shall be lords of the unsullied Light, and masters of thebliss and beauty of Arda. No other race shall oust us!’
Then Feanor swore a terrible oath. His seven sons leapt straightway to his sideand took the selfsame vow together, and red as blood shone their drawn swordsin the glare of the torches. They swore an oath which none shall break, and noneshould take, by the name even of Ilhvatar, calling the Everlasting Dark uponthem if they kept it not; and Manwe they named in witness, and Varda, and thehallowed mountain of Taniquetil, vowing to pursue with vengeance and hatred tothe ends of the World Vala, Demon, Elf or Man as yet unborn, or any creature,great or small, good or evil, that time should bring forth unto the end of days,whoso should hold or take or keep a Silmaril from their possession.
Thus spoke Maedhros and Maglor and Celegorm, Curufin and Caranthir,Amrod and Amras, princes of the Noldor; and many quailed to hear the dreadwords. For so sworn, good or evil, an oath may not be broken, and it shall pursueoathkeeper and oathbreaker to the world’s end. Fingolfin and Turgon his sontherefore spoke against Feanor, and fierce words awoke, so that once again wrathcame near to the edge of swords. But Finarfin spoke softly, as was his wont, andsought to calm the Noldor, persuading them to pause and ponder ere deeds weredone that could not be undone: and Orodreth, alone of his sons, spoke in likemanner. Finrod was with Turgon, his friend; but Galadriel, the only woman ofthe Noldor to stand that day tall and valiant among the contending princes, waseager to be gone. No oaths she swore, but the words of Feanor concerningMiddle-earth had kindled in her heart, for she yearned to see the wide unguardedlands and to rule there a realm at her own will. Of like mind with Galadriel wasFingon Fingolfin’s son, being moved also by Feanor’s words, though he lovedhim little; and with Fingon stood as they ever did Angrod and Aegnor, sons ofFinarfin. But these held their peace and spoke not against their fathers.
At length after long debate Feanor prevailed, and the greater part of theNoldor there assembled he set aflame with the desire of new things and strangecountries. Therefore when Finarfin spoke yet again for heed and delay, a greatshout went up: ‘Nay, let us be gone!’ And straightway Feanor and his sons beganto prepare for the marching forth.
Little foresight could there be for those who dared to take so dark a road. Yetall was done in over-haste; for Feanor drove them on, fearing lest in the coolingof their hearts his words should wane and other counsels yet prevail; and for allhis proud words he did not forget the power of the Valar. But from Valmar nomessage came, and Manwe was silent. He would not yet either forbid or hinderFeanor’s purpose; for the Valar were aggrieved that they were charged with evilintent to the Eldar, or that any were held captive by them against their will. Nowthey watched and waited, for they did not yet believe that Feanor could hold thehost of the Noldor to his will.
And indeed when Feanor began the marshalling of the Noldor for theirsetting-out, then at once dissension arose. For though he had brought theassembly in a mind to depart, by no means all were of a mind to take Feanor asKing. Greater love was given to Fingolfin and his sons, and his household andthe most part of the dwellers in Tirion refused to renounce him, if he would gowith them; and thus at the last as two divided hosts the Noldor set forth upontheir bitter road. Feanor and his following were in the van, but the greater hostcame behind under Fingolfin; and he marched against his wisdom, becauseFingon his son so urged him, and because he would not be sundered from hispeople that were eager to go, nor leave them to the rash counsels of Feanor. Nordid he forget his words before the throne of Manwe. With Fingolfin wentFinarfin also and for like reasons; but most loath was he to depart. And of all theNoldor in Valinor, who were grown now to a great people, but one tithe refusedto take the road: some for the love that they bore to the Valar (and to Aule notleast), some for the love of Tirion and the many things that they had made; nonefor fear of peril by the way.
But even as the trumpet sang and Feanor issued from the gates of Tirion amessenger came at last from Manwe, saying: 'Against the folly of Feanor shallbe set my counsel only. Go not forth! For the hour is evil, and your road leads tosorrow that ye do not foresee. No aid will the Valar lend you in this quest; butneither will they hinder you; for this ye shall know: as ye came hither freely,freely shall ye depart. But thou Feanor Finwe’s son, by thine oath art exiled. Thelies of Melkor thou shalt unlearn in bitterness. Vala he is, thou saist. Then thouhast sworn in vain, for none of the Valar canst thou overcome now or ever withinthe halls of Ea, not though Eru whom thou namest had made thee thrice greaterthan thou art.’
But Feanor laughed, and spoke not to the herald, but to the Noldor, saying:‘So! Then will this valiant people send forth the heir of their King alone intobanishment with his sons only, and return to their bondage? But if any will comewith me, I say to them: Is sorrow foreboded to you? But in Aman we have seenit. In Aman we have come through bliss to woe. The other now we will try:through sorrow to find joy; or freedom, at the least.’
Then turning to the herald he cried: ‘Say this to Manwe Sulimo, High King ofArda: if Feanor cannot overthrow Morgoth, at least he delays not to assail him,and sits not idle in grief. And it may be that Eru has set in me a fire greater thanthou knowest. Such hurt at the least will I do to the Foe of the Valar that even themighty in the Ring of Doom shall wonder to hear it. Yea, in the end they shallfollow me. Farewell!’
In that hour the voice of Feanor grew so great and so potent that even the
herald of the Valar bowed before him as one full-answered, and departed; andthe Noldor were over-ruled. Therefore they continued their march; and theHouse of Feanor hastened before them along the coasts of Elende: not once didthey turn their eyes back to Tirion on the green hill of Tuna. Slower and lesseagerly came the host of Fingolfin after them. Of those Fingon was the foremost;but at the rear went Finarfin and Finrod, and many of the noblest and wisest ofthe Noldor; and often they looked behind them to see their fair city, until thelamp of the Mindon Eldalieva was lost in the night. More than any others of theExiles they carried thence memories of the bliss they had forsaken, and someeven of the things that they had made there they took with them: a solace and aburden on the road.
Now Feanor led the Noldor northward, because his first purpose was to followMorgoth. Moreover Tuna beneath Taniquetil was set nigh to the girdle of Arda,and there the Great Sea was immeasurably wide, whereas ever northward thesundering seas grew narrower, as the wasteland of Araman and the coasts ofMiddle-earth drew together. But as the mind of Feanor cooled and took counselhe perceived over-late that all these great companies would never overcome thelong leagues to the north, nor cross the seas at the last, save with the aid of ships;yet it would need long time and toil to build so great a fleet, even were there anyamong the Noldor skilled in that craft. He resolved now therefore to persuade theTeleri, ever friends to the Noldor, to join with them; and in his rebellion hethought that thus the bliss of Valinor might be further diminished and his powerfor war upon Morgoth be increased. He hastened then to Alqualonde, and spoketo the Teleri as he had spoken before in Tirion.
But the Teleri were unmoved by aught that he could say. They were grievedindeed at the going of their kinsfolk and long friends, but would rather dissuadethem than aid them; and no ship would they lend, nor help in the building,against the will of the Valar. As for themselves, they desired now no other homebut the strands of Eldamar, and no other lord than Olwe, prince of Alqualonde.And he had never lent ear to Morgoth, nor welcomed him to his land, and hetrusted still that Ulmo and the other great among the Valar would redress thehurts of Morgoth, and that the night would pass yet to a new dawn.
Then Feanor grew wrathful, for he still feared delay; and hotly he spoke toOlwe. ‘You renounce your friendship, even in the hour of our need/ he said. ‘Yetyou were glad indeed to receive our aid when you came at last to these shores,fainthearted loiterers, and wellnigh emptyhanded. In huts on the beaches wouldyou be dwelling still, had not the Noldor carved out your haven and toiled uponyour walls/
But Olwe answered: ‘We renounce no friendship. But it may be the part of afriend to rebuke a friend’s folly. And when the Noldor welcomed us and gave usaid, otherwise then you spoke: in the land of Aman we were to dwell for ever, asbrothers whose houses stand side by side. But as for our white ships: those yougave us not. We learned not that craft from the Noldor, but from the Lords of theSea; and the white timbers we wrought with our own hands, and the white sailswere woven by our wives and our daughters. Therefore we will neither givethem nor sell them for any league or friendship. For I say to you, Feanor son ofFinwe, these are to us as are the gems of the Noldor: the work of our hearts,
whose like we shall not make again.’
Thereupon Feanor left him, and sat in dark thought beyond the walls ofAlqualonde, until his host was assembled. When he judged that his strength wasenough, he went to the Haven of the Swans and began to man the ships that wereanchored there and to take them away by force. But the Teleri withstood him,and cast many of the Noldor into the sea. Then swords were drawn, and a bitterfight was fought upon the ships, and about the lamplit quays and piers of theHaven, and even upon the great arch of its gate. Thrice the people of Feanorwere driven back, and many were slain upon either side; but the vanguard of theNoldor were succoured by Fingon with the foremost of the host of Fingolfin,who coming up found a battle joined and their own kin falling, and rushed inbefore they knew rightly the cause of the quarrel; some thought indeed that theTeleri had sought to waylay the march of the Noldor at the bidding of the Valar.
Thus at last the Teleri were overcome, and a great part of their mariners thatdwelt in Alqualonde were wickedly slain. For the Noldor were become fierceand desperate, and the Teleri had less strength, and were armed for the most partbut with slender bows. Then the Noldor drew away their white ships and mannedtheir oars as best they might, and rowed them north along the coast. And Olwecalled upon Osse, but he came not, for it was not permitted by the Valar that theflight of the Noldor should be hindered by force. But Uinen wept for themariners of the Teleri; and the sea rose in wrath against the slayers, so that manyof the ships were wrecked and those in them drowned. Of the Kinslaying atAlqualonde more is told in that lament which is named Noldolante, the Fall ofthe Noldor, that Maglor made ere he was lost.
Nonetheless the greater part of the Noldor escaped, and when the storm waspast they held on their course, some by ship and some by land; but the way waslong and ever more evil as they went forward. After they had marched for a greatwhile in the unmeasured night, they came at length to the northern confines ofthe Guarded Realm, upon the borders of the empty waste of Araman which weremountainous and cold. There they beheld suddenly a dark figure standing highupon a rock that looked down upon the shore. Some say that it was Mandoshimself, and no lesser herald of Manwe. And they heard a loud voice, solemnand terrible, that bade them stand and give ear. Then all halted and stood still,and from end to end of the hosts of the Noldor the voice was heard speaking thecurse and prophecy which is called the Prophecy of the North, and the Doom ofthe Noldor. Much it foretold in dark words, which the Noldor understood notuntil the woes indeed after befell them; but all heard the curse that was utteredupon those that would not stay nor seek the doom and pardon of the Valar.
Tears unnumbered ye shall shed; and the Valar will fence Valinor against you,
and shut you out, so that not even the echo of your lamentation shall pass overthe mountains. On the House of Feanor the wrath of the Valar lieth from theWest unto the uttermost East, and upon all that will follow them it shall be laidalso. Their Oath shall drive them, and yet betray them, and ever snatch away thevery treasures that they have sworn to pursue. To evil end shall all things turnthat they begin well; and by treason of kin unto kin, and the fear of treason, shallthis come to pass. The Dispossessed shall they be for ever.
‘Ye have spilled the blood of your kindred unrighteously and have stained theland of Aman. For blood ye shall render blood, and beyond Aman ye shall dwellin Death’s shadow. For though Eru appointed to you to die not in Ea, and nosickness may assail you, yet slain ye may be, and slain ye shall be: by weaponand by torment and by grief; and your houseless spirits shall come then toMandos. There long shall ye abide and yearn for your bodies, and find little pitythough all whom ye have slain should entreat for you. And those that endure inMiddle-earth and come not to Mandos shall grow weary of the world as with agreat burden, and shall wane, and become as shadows of regret before theyounger race that cometh after. The Valar have spoken.’
Then many quailed; but Feanor hardened his heart and said: ‘We have sworn,and not lightly. This oath we will keep. We are threatened with many evils, andtreason not least; but one thing is not said: that we shall suffer from cowardice,from cravens or the fear of cravens. Therefore I say that we will go on, and thisdoom I add: the deeds that we shall do shall be the matter of song until the lastdays of Arda.’
But in that hour Finarfin forsook the march, and turned back, being filled withgrief, and with bitterness against the House of Feanor, because of his kinshipwith Olwe of Alqualonde; and many of his people went with him, retracing theirsteps in sorrow, until they beheld once more the far beam of the Mindon uponTuna still shining in the night, and so came at last to Valinor. There they receivedthe pardon of the Valar, and Finarfin was set to rule the remnant of the Noldor inthe Blessed Realm. But his sons were not with him, for they would not forsakethe sons of Fingolfin; and all Fingolfin’s folk went forward still, feeling theconstraint of their kinship and the will of Feanor, and fearing to face the doom ofthe Valar, since not all of them had been guiltless of the Kinslaying atAlqualonde. Moreover Fingon and Turgon were bold and fiery of heart, andloath to abandon any task to which they had put their hands until the bitter end,if bitter it must be. So the main host held on, and swiftly the evil that wasforetold began its work.
The Noldor came at last far into the north of Arda; and they saw the first teethof the ice that floated in the sea, and knew that they were drawing nigh to the
Helcaraxe. For between the land of Aman that in the north curved eastward, andthe east-shores of Endor (which is Middle-earth) that bore westward, there was anarrow strait, through which the chill waters of the Encircling Sea and the wavesof Belegaer flowed together, and there were vast fogs and mists of deathly cold,and the sea-streams were filled with clashing hills of ice and the grinding of icedeep-sunken. Such was the Helcaraxe, and there none yet had dared to tread savethe Valar only and Ungoliant.
Therefore Feanor halted and the Noldor debated what course they should nowtake. But they began to suffer anguish from the cold, and the clinging miststhrough which no gleam of star could pierce; and many repented of the road andbegan to murmur, especially those that followed Fingolfin, cursing Feanor, andnaming him as the cause of all the woes of the Eldar. But Feanor, knowing allthat was said, took counsel with his sons; and two courses only they saw toescape from Araman and come into Endor: by the straits or by ship. But theHelcaraxe they deemed impassable, whereas the ships were too few. Many hadbeen lost upon their long journey, and there remained now not enough to bearacross all the great host together; yet none were willing to abide upon thewestern coast while others were ferried first: already the fear of treachery wasawake among the Noldor. Therefore it came into the hearts of Feanor and hissons to seize all the ships and depart suddenly; for they had retained the masteryof the fleet since the battle of the Haven, and it was manned only by those whohad fought there and were bound to Feanor. And as though it came at his call,there sprang up a wind from the north-west, and Feanor slipped away secretlywith all whom he deemed true to him, and went aboard, and put out to sea, andleft Fingolfin in Araman. And since the sea was there narrow, steering east andsomewhat south he passed over without loss, and first of all the Noldor set footonce more upon the shores of Middle-earth; and the landing of Feanor was at themouth of the firth which was called Drengist and ran into Dor-lomin.
But when they were landed, Maedhros the eldest of his sons, and on a time thefriend of Fingon ere Morgoth’s lies came between, spoke to Feanor, saying:‘Now what ships and rowers will you spare to return, and whom shall they bearhither first? Fingon the valiant?’
Then Feanor laughed as one fey, and he cried: ‘None and none! What I haveleft behind I count now no loss; needless baggage on the road it has proved. Letthose that cursed my name, curse me still, and whine their way back to the cagesof the Valar! Let the ships burn!’ Then Maedhros alone stood aside, but Feanorcaused fire to be set to the white ships of the Teleri. So in that place which wascalled Losgar at the outlet of the Firth of Drengist ended the fairest vessels thatever sailed the sea, in a great burning, bright and terrible. And Fingolfin and his
people saw the light afar off, red beneath the clouds; and they knew that theywere betrayed. This was the firstfruits of the Kinslaying and the Doom of theNoldor.
Then Fingolfin seeing that Feanor had left him to perish in Araman or returnin shame to Valinor was filled with bitterness; but he desired now as neverbefore to come by some way to Middle-earth, and meet Feanor again. And heand his host wandered long in misery, but their valour and endurance grew withhardship; for they were a mighty people, the elder children undying of EruIluvatar, but new-come from the Blessed Realm, and not yet weary with theweariness of Earth. The fire of their hearts was young, and led by Fingolfin andhis sons, and by Finrod and Galadriel, they dared to pass into the bitterest North;and finding no other way they endured at last the terror of the Helcaraxe and thecruel hills of ice. Few of the deeds of the Noldor thereafter surpassed thatdesperate crossing in hardihood or woe. There Elenwe the wife of Turgon waslost, and many others perished also; and it was with a lessened host thatFingolfin set foot at last upon the Outer Lands. Small love for Feanor or his sonshad those that marched at last behind him, and blew their trumpets in Middle-earth at the first rising of the Moon.
CHAPTER 10
OF THE SINDAR
Now as has been told the power of Elwe and Melian increased in Middle-earth,and all the Elves of Beleriand, from the mariners of Cardan to the wanderinghunters of the Blue Mountains beyond the River Gelion, owned Elwe as theirlord; Elu Thingol he was called, King Greymantle, in the tongue of his people.They are called the Sindar, the Grey-elves of starlit Beleriand; and although theywere Moriquendi, under the lordship of Thingol and the teaching of Melian theybecame the fairest and the most wise and skilful of all the Elves of Middle-earth.And at the end of the first age of the Chaining of Melkor, when all the Earth hadpeace and the glory of Valinor was at its noon, there came into the worldLuthien, the only child of Thingol and Melian. Though Middle-earth lay for themost part in the Sleep of Yavanna, in Beleriand under the power of Melian therewas life and joy, and the bright stars shone as silver fires; and there in the forestof Neldoreth Luthien was born, and the white flowers of niphredil came forth togreet her as stars from the earth.
It came to pass during the second age of the captivity of Melkor that Dwarvescame over the Blue Mountains of Ered Luin into Beleriand. Themselves theynamed Khazad, but the Sindar called them Naugrim, the Stunted People, andGonnhirrim, Masters of Stone. Far to the east were the most ancient dwellings ofthe Naugrim, but they had delved for themselves great halls and mansions, afterthe manner of their kind, in the eastern side of Ered Luin; and those cities werenamed in their own tongue Gabilgathol and Tumunzahar. To the north of thegreat height of Mount Dolmed was Gabilgathol, which the Elves interpreted intheir tongue Belegost, that is Mickleburg; and southward was delvedTumunzahar, by the Elves named Nogrod, the Hollowbold. Greatest of all themansions of the Dwarves was Khazad-dum, the Dwarrowdelf, Hadhodrond inthe Elvish tongue, that was afterwards in the days of its darkness called Moria;but it was far off in the Mountains of Mist beyond the wide leagues of Eriador,and to the Eldar came but as a name and a rumour from the words of theDwarves of the Blue Mountains.
From Nogrod and Belegost the Naugrim came forth into Beleriand; and theElves were filled with amazement, for they had believed themselves to be theonly living things in Middle-earth that spoke with words or wrought with hands,and that all others were but birds and beasts. But they could understand no wordof the tongue of the Naugrim, which to their ears was cumbrous and unlovely;
and few ever of the Eldar have achieved the mastery of it. But the Dwarves wereswift to learn and indeed were more willing to learn the Elven-tongue than toteach their own to those of alien race. Few of the Eldar went ever to Nogrod andBelegost, save Eol of Nan Elmoth and Maeglin his son; but the Dwarvestrafficked into Beleriand, and they made a great road that passed under theshoulders of Mount Dolmed and followed the course of the River Ascar,crossing Gelion at Sarn Athrad, the Ford of Stones, where battle after befell.Ever cool was the friendship between the Naugrim and the Eldar, though muchprofit they had one of the other; but at that time those griefs that lay betweenthem had not yet come to pass, and King Thingol welcomed them. But theNaugrim gave their friendship more readily to the Noldor in after days than toany others of Elves and Men, because of their love and reverence for Aule; andthe gems of the Noldor they praised above all other wealth. In the darkness ofArda already the Dwarves wrought great works, for even from the first days oftheir Fathers they had marvellous skill with metals and with stone; but in thatancient time iron and copper they loved to work, rather than silver or gold.
Now Melian had much foresight, after the manner of the Maiar; and when thesecond age of the captivity of Melkor had passed, she counselled Thingol thatthe Peace of Arda would not last for ever. He took thought therefore how heshould make for himself a kingly dwelling, and a place that should be strong, ifevil were to awake again in Middle-earth; and he sought aid and counsel of theDwarves of Belegost. They gave it willingly, for they were unwearied in thosedays and eager for new works; and though the Dwarves ever demanded a pricefor all that they did, whether with delight or with toil, at this time they heldthemselves paid. For Melian taught them much that they were eager to learn, andThingol rewarded them with many fair pearls. These Cirdan gave to him, forthey were got in great number in the shallow waters about the Isle of Balar; butthe Naugrim had not before seen their like, and they held them dear. One therewas as great as a dove’s egg, and its sheen was as starlight on the foam of thesea; Nimphelos it was named, and the chieftain of the Dwarves of Belegostprized it above a mountain of wealth.
Therefore the Naugrim laboured long and gladly for Thingol, and devised forhim mansions after the fashion of their people, delved deep in the earth. Wherethe Esgalduin flowed down, and parted Neldoreth from Region, there rose in themidst of the forest a rocky hill, and the river ran at its feet. There they made thegates of the hall of Thingol, and they built a bridge of stone over the river, bywhich alone the gates could be entered. Beyond the gates wide passages randown to high halls and chambers far below that were hewn in the living stone, somany and so great that that dwelling was named Menegroth, the Thousand
Caves.
But the Elves also had part in that labour, and Elves and Dwarves together,each with their own skill, there wrought out the visions of Melian, images of thewonder and beauty of Valinor beyond the Sea. The pillars of Menegroth werehewn in the likeness of the beeches of Orome, stock, bough, and leaf, and theywere lit with lanterns of gold. The nightingales sang there as in the gardens ofLorien; and there were fountains of silver, and basins of marble, and floors ofmany-coloured stones. Carven figures of beasts and birds there ran upon thewalls, or climbed upon the pillars, or peered among the branches entwined withmany flowers. And as the years passed Melian and her maidens filled the hallswith woven hangings wherein could be read the deeds of the Valar, and manythings that had befallen in Arda since its beginning, and shadows of things thatwere yet to be. That was the fairest dwelling of any king that has ever been eastof the Sea.
And when the building of Menegroth was achieved, and there was peace inthe realm of Thingol and Melian, the Naugrim yet came ever and anon over themountains and went in traffic about the lands; but they went seldom to the Falas,for they hated the sound of the sea and feared to look upon it. To Beleriand therecame no other rumour or tidings of the world without.
But as the third age of the captivity of Melkor drew on, the Dwarves becametroubled, and they spoke to King Thingol, saying that the Valar had not rootedout utterly the evils of the North, and now the remnant, having long multiplied inthe dark, were coming forth once more and roaming far and wide. ‘There are fellbeasts/ they said, ‘in the land east of the mountains, and your ancient kindredthat dwell there are flying from the plains to the hills/
And ere long the evil creatures came even to Beleriand, over passes in themountains, or up from the south through the dark forests. Wolves there were, orcreatures that walked in wolf-shapes, and other fell beings of shadow; andamong them were the Ores, who afterwards wrought ruin in Beleriand: but theywere yet few and wary, and did but smell out the ways of the land, awaiting thereturn of their lord. Whence they came, or what they were, the Elves knew notthen, thinking them perhaps to be Avari who had become evil and savage in thewild; in which they guessed all too near, it is said.
Therefore Thingol took thought for arms, which before his people had notneeded, and these at first the Naugrim smithied for him; for they were greatlyskilled in such work, though none among them surpassed the craftsmen ofNogrod, of whom Telchar the smith was greatest in renown. A warlike race ofold were all the Naugrim, and they would fight fiercely against whomsoeveraggrieved them: servants of Melkor, or Eldar, or Avari, or wild beasts, or not
seldom their own kin, Dwarves of other mansions and lordships. Theirsmithcraft indeed the Sindar soon learned of them; yet in the tempering of steelalone of all crafts the Dwarves were never outmatched even by the Noldor, andin the making of mail of linked rings, which was first contrived by the smiths ofBelegost, their work had no rival.
At this time therefore the Sindar were well-armed, and they drove off allcreatures of evil, and had peace again; but Thingol’s armouries were stored withaxes and with spears and swords, and tall helms, and long coats of bright mail;for the hauberks of the Dwarves were so fashioned that they rusted not but shoneever as if they were new-burnished. And that proved well for Thingol in the timethat was to come.
Now as has been told, one Lenwe of the host of Olwe forsook the march ofthe Eldar at that time when the Teleri were halted by the shores of the GreatRiver upon the borders of the westlands of Middle-earth. Little is known of thewanderings of the Nandor, whom he led away down Anduin: some, it is said,dwelt age-long in the woods of the Vale of the Great River, some came at last toits mouths and there dwelt by the Sea, and yet others passing by Ered Nimrais,the White Mountains, came north again and entered the wilderness of Eriadorbetween Ered Luin and the far Mountains of Mist. Now these were a woodlandpeople and had no weapons of steel, and the coming of the fell beasts of theNorth filled them with great fear, as the Naugrim declared to King Thingol inMenegroth. Therefore Denethor, the son of Lenwe, hearing rumour of the mightof Thingol and his majesty, and of the peace of his realm, gathered such host ofhis scattered people as he could, and led them over the mountains into Beleriand.There they were welcomed by Thingol, as kin long lost that return, and theydwelt in Ossiriand, the Land of Seven Rivers.
Of the long years of peace that followed after the coming of Denethor there islittle tale. In those days, it is said, Daeron the Minstrel, chief loremaster of thekingdom of Thingol, devised his Runes; and the Naugrim that came to Thingollearned them, and were well-pleased with the device, esteeming Daeron’s skillhigher than did the Sindar, his own people. By the Naugrim the Cirth were takeneast over the mountains and passed into the knowledge of many peoples; butthey were little used by the Sindar for the keeping of records, until the days ofthe War, and much that was held in memory perished in the ruins of Doriath. Butof bliss and glad life there is little to be said, before it ends; as works fair andwonderful, while still they endure for eyes to see, are their own record, and onlywhen they are in peril or broken for ever do they pass into song.
In Beleriand in those days the Elves walked, and the rivers flowed, and thestars shone, and the night-flowers gave forth their scents; and the beauty ofMelian was as the noon, and the beauty of Luthien was as the dawn in spring. InBeleriand King Thingol upon his throne was as the lords of the Maiar, whosepower is at rest, whose joy is as an air that they breathe in all their days, whosethought flows in a tide untroubled from the heights to the deeps. In Beleriandstill at times rode Orome the great, passing like a wind over the mountains, andthe sound of his horn came down the leagues of the starlight, and the Elvesfeared him for the splendour of his countenance and the great noise of the onrushof Nahar; but when the Valaroma echoed in the hills, they knew well that all evilthings were fled far away.
But it came to pass at last that the end of bliss was at hand, and the noontideof Valinor was drawing to its twilight. For as has been told and as is known toall, being written in lore and sung in many songs, Melkor slew the Trees of theValar with the aid of Ungoliant, and escaped, and came back to Middle-earth.Far to the north befell the strife of Morgoth and Ungoliant; but the great cry ofMorgoth echoed through Beleriand, and all its people shrank for fear; for thoughthey knew not what it foreboded, they heard then the herald of death. Soonafterwards Ungoliant fled from the north and came into the realm of KingThingol, and a terror of darkness was about her; but by the power of Melian shewas stayed, and entered not into Neldoreth, but abode long time under theshadow of the precipices in which Dorthonion fell southward. And they becameknown as Ered Gorgoroth, the Mountains of Terror, and none dared go thither, orpass nigh them; there life and light were strangled, and there all waters werepoisoned. But Morgoth, as has before been told, returned to Angband, and builtit anew, and above its doors he reared the reeking towers of Thangorodrim; andthe gates of Morgoth were but one hundred and fifty leagues distant from thebridge of Menegroth; far and yet all too near.
Now the Ores that multiplied in the darkness of the earth grew strong and fell,and their dark lord filled them with a lust of ruin and death; and they issued fromAngband’s gates under the clouds that Morgoth sent forth, and passed silentlyinto the highlands of the north. Thence on a sudden a great army came intoBeleriand and assailed King Thingol. Now in his wide realm many Elveswandered free in the wild, or dwelt at peace in small kindreds far sundered; andonly about Menegroth in the midst of the land, and along the Falas in the countryof the mariners, were there numerous peoples. But the Ores came down uponeither side of Menegroth, and from camps in the east between Celon and Gelion,
and west in the plains between Sirion and Narog, they plundered far and wide;and Thingol was cut off from Cirdan at Eglarest. Therefore he called uponDenethor; and the Elves came in force from Region beyond Aros and fromOssiriand, and fought the first battle in the Wars of Beleriand. And the easternhost of the Ores was taken between the armies of the Eldar, north of the Andramand midway between Aros and Gelion, and there they were utterly defeated, andthose that fled north from the great slaughter were waylaid by the axes of theNaugrim that issued from Mount Dolmed: few indeed returned to Angband.
But the victory of the Elves was dear-bought. For those of Ossiriand werelight-armed, and no match for the Ores, who were shod with iron and iron-shielded and bore great spears with broad blades; and Denethor was cut off andsurrounded upon the hill of Amon Ereb. There he fell and all his nearest kinabout him, before the host of Thingol could come to his aid. Bitterly though hisfall was avenged, when Thingol came upon the rear of the Ores and slew them inheaps, his people lamented him ever after and took no king again. After thebattle some returned to Ossiriand, and their tidings filled the remnant of theirpeople with great fear, so that thereafter they came never forth in open war, butkept themselves by wariness and secrecy; and they were called the Laiquendi,the Green-elves, because of their raiment of the colour of leaves. But many wentnorth and entered the guarded realm of Thingol, and were merged with hispeople.
And when Thingol came again to Menegroth he learned that the Ore-host inthe west was victorious, and had driven Cirdan to the rim of the sea. Thereforehe withdrew all his people that his summons could reach within the fastness ofNeldoreth and Region, and Melian put forth her power and fenced all thatdominion round about with an unseen wall of shadow and bewilderment: theGirdle of Melian, that none thereafter could pass against her will or the will ofKing Thingol, unless one should come with a power greater than that of Melianthe Maia. And this inner land, which was long named Eglador, was after calledDoriath, the guarded kingdom, Land of the Girdle. Within it there was yet awatchful peace; but without there was peril and great fear, and the servants ofMorgoth roamed at will, save in the walled havens of the Falas.
But new tidings were at hand, which none in Middle-earth had foreseen,neither Morgoth in his pits nor Melian in Menegroth; for no news came out ofAman, whether by messenger, or by spirit, or by vision in dream, after the deathof the Trees. In this same time Feanor came over the Sea in the white ships of theTeleri, and landed in the Firth of Drengist, and there burned the ships at Losgar.
CHAPTER 11
OF THE SUN AND MOON AND THE HIDING OF VALINOR
It is told that after the flight of Melkor the Valar sat long unmoved upon theirthrones in the Ring of Doom; but they were not idle, as Feanor declared in thefolly of his heart. For the Valar may work many things with thought rather thanwith hands, and without voices in silence they may hold council one withanother. Thus they held vigil in the night of Valinor, and their thought passedback beyond Ea and forth to the End; yet neither power nor wisdom assuagedtheir grief, and the knowing of evil in the hour of its being. And they mournednot more for the death of the Trees than for the marring of Feanor: of the worksof Melkor one of the most evil. For Feanor was made the mightiest in all parts ofbody and mind, in valour, in endurance, in beauty, in understanding, in skill, instrength and in subtlety alike, of all the Children of Iluvatar, and a bright flamewas in him. The works of wonder for the glory of Arda that he might otherwisehave wrought only Manwe might in some measure conceive. And it was told bythe Vanyar who held vigil with the Valar that when the messengers declared toManwe the answers of Feanor to his heralds, Manwe wept and bowed his head.But at that last word of Feanor: that at the least the Noldor should do deeds tolive in song for ever, he raised his head, as one that hears a voice far off, and hesaid: ‘So shall it be! Dear-bought those songs shall be accounted, and yet shallbe well-bought. For the price could be no other. Thus even as Eru spoke to usshall beauty not before conceived be brought into Ea, and evil yet be good tohave been.’
But Mandos said: ‘And yet remain evil. To me shall Feanor come soon.’
But when at last the Valar learned that the Noldor had indeed passed out ofAman and were come back into Middle-earth, they arose and began to set forthin deeds those counsels which they had taken in thought for the redress of theevils of Melkor. Then Manwe bade Yavanna and Nienna to put forth all theirpowers of growth and healing; and they put forth all their powers upon the Trees.But the tears of Nienna availed not to heal their mortal wounds; and for a longwhile Yavanna sang alone in the shadows. Yet even as hope failed and her songfaltered, Telperion bore at last upon a leafless bough one great flower of silver,and Laurelin a single fruit of gold.
These Yavanna took; and then the Trees died, and their lifeless stems stand yetin Valinor, a memorial of vanished joy. But the flower and the fruit Yavannagave to Aule, and Manwe hallowed them, and Aule and his people made vessels
to hold them and preserve their radiance: as is said in the Narsilion, the Song ofthe Sun and Moon. These vessels the Valar gave to Varda, that they mightbecome lamps of heaven, outshining the ancient stars, being nearer to Arda; andshe gave them power to traverse the lower regions of Ilmen, and set them tovoyage upon appointed courses above the girdle of the Earth from the West untothe East and to return.
These things the Valar did, recalling in their twilight the darkness of the landsof Arda; and they resolved now to illumine Middle-earth and with light to hinderthe deeds of Melkor. For they remembered the Avari that remained by the watersof their awakening, and they did not utterly forsake the Noldor in exile; andManwe knew also that the hour of the coming of Men was drawn nigh. And it issaid indeed that, even as the Valar made war upon Melkor for the sake of theQuendi, so now for that time they forbore for the sake of the Hildor, theAftercomers, the younger Children of Iluvatar. For so grievous had been thehurts of Middle-earth in the war upon Utumno that the Valar feared lest evenworse should now befall; whereas the Hildor should be mortal, and weaker thanthe Quendi to withstand fear and tumult. Moreover it was not revealed to Manwewhere the beginning of Men should be, north, south, or east. Therefore the Valarsent forth light, but made strong the land of their dwelling.
Isil the Sheen the Vanyar of old named the Moon, flower of Telperion inValinor; and Anar the Fire-golden, fruit of Faurelin, they named the Sun. But theNoldor named them also Rana, the Wayward, and Vasa, the Heart of Fire, thatawakens and consumes; for the Sun was set as a sign for the awakening of Menand the waning of the Elves, but the Moon cherishes their memory.
The maiden whom the Valar chose from among the Maiar to guide the vesselof the Sun was named Arien, and he that steered the island of the Moon wasTilion. In the days of the Trees Arien had tended the golden flowers in thegardens of Vana, and watered them with the bright dews of Faurelin; but Tilionwas a hunter of the company of Orome, and he had a silver bow. He was a loverof silver, and when he would rest he forsook the woods of Orome, and going intoForien he lay in dream by the pools of Este, in Telperion’s flickering beams; andhe begged to be given the task of tending for ever the last Flower of Silver. Arienthe maiden was mightier than he, and she was chosen because she had not fearedthe heats of Faurelin, and was unhurt by them, being from the beginning a spiritof fire, whom Melkor had not deceived nor drawn to his service. Too bright werethe eyes of Arien for even the Eldar to look on, and leaving Valinor she forsookthe form and raiment which like the Valar she had worn there, and she was as anaked flame, terrible in the fullness of her splendour.
Isil was first wrought and made ready, and first rose into the realm of the stars,
and was the elder of the new lights, as was Telperion of the Trees. Then for awhile the world had moonlight, and many things stirred and woke that hadwaited long in the sleep of Yavanna. The servants of Morgoth were filled withamazement, but the Elves of the Outer Lands looked up in delight; and even asthe Moon rose above the darkness in the west, Fingolfin let blow his silvertrumpets and began his march into Middle-earth, and the shadows of his hostwent long and black before them.
Tilion had traversed the heaven seven times, and thus was in the furthest east,when the vessel of Arien was made ready. Then Anar arose in glory, and the firstdawn of the Sun was like a great fire upon the towers of the Pelori: the clouds ofMiddle-earth were kindled, and there was heard the sound of many waterfalls.Then indeed Morgoth was dismayed, and he descended into the uttermost depthsof Angband, and withdrew his servants, sending forth great reek and dark cloudto hide his land from the light of the Daystar.
Now Varda purposed that the two vessels should journey in Ilmen and ever bealoft, but not together; each should pass from Valinor into the east and return, theone issuing from the west as the other turned from the east. Thus the first of thenew days were reckoned after the manner of the Trees, from the mingling of thelights when Arien and Tilion passed in their courses, above the middle of theEarth. But Tilion was wayward and uncertain in speed, and held not to hisappointed path; and he sought to come near to Arien, being drawn by hersplendour, though the flame of Anar scorched him, and the island of the Moonwas darkened.
Because of the waywardness of Tilion, therefore, and yet more because of theprayers of Lorien and Este, who said that sleep and rest had been banished fromthe Earth, and the stars were hidden, Varda changed her counsel, and allowed atime wherein the world should still have shadow and half-light. Anar restedtherefore a while in Valinor, lying upon the cool bosom of the Outer Sea; andEvening, the time of the descent and resting of the Sun, was the hour of greatestlight and joy in Aman. But soon the Sun was drawn down by the servants ofUlmo, and went then in haste under the Earth, and so came unseen to the eastand there mounted the heaven again, lest night be over-long and evil walk underthe Moon. But by Anar the waters of the Outer Sea were made hot and glowedwith coloured fire, and Valinor had light for a while after the passing of Arien.Yet as she journeyed under the Earth and drew towards the east the glow fadedand Valinor was dim, and the Valar mourned then most for the death of Laurelin.At dawn the shadows of the Mountains of Defence lay heavy on the BlessedRealm.
Varda commanded the Moon to journey in like manner, and passing under
Earth to arise in the east, but only after the Sun had descended from heaven. ButTilion went with uncertain pace, as yet he goes, and was still drawn towardsArien, as he shall ever be; so that often both may be seen above the Earthtogether, or at times it will chance that he comes so nigh that his shadow cuts offher brightness and there is a darkness amid the day.
Therefore by the coming and going of Anar the Valar reckoned the daysthereafter until the Change of the World. For Tilion tarried seldom in Valinor, butmore often would pass swiftly over the western land, over Avathar, or Araman,or Valinor, and plunge in the chasm beyond the Outer Sea, pursuing his wayalone amid the grots and caverns at the roots of Arda. There he would oftenwander long, and late would return.
Still therefore, after the Long Night, the light of Valinor was greater and fairerthan upon Middle-earth; for the Sun rested there, and the lights of heaven drewnearer to Earth in that region. But neither the Sun nor the Moon can recall thelight that was of old, that came from the Trees before they were touched by thepoison of Ungoliant. That light lives now in the Silmarils alone.
But Morgoth hated the new lights, and was for a while confounded by thisunlooked-for stroke of the Valar. Then he assailed Tilion, sending spirits ofshadow against him, and there was strife in Ilmen beneath the paths of the stars;but Tilion was victorious. And Arien Morgoth feared with a great fear, but darednot come nigh her, having indeed no longer the power; for as he grew in malice,and sent forth from himself the evil that he conceived in lies and creatures ofwickedness, his might passed into them and was dispersed, and he himselfbecame ever more bound to the earth, unwilling to issue from his darkstrongholds. With shadows he hid himself and his servants from Arien, theglance of whose eyes they could not long endure; and the lands near his dwellingwere shrouded in fumes and great clouds.
But seeing the assault upon Tilion the Valar were in doubt, fearing what themalice and cunning of Morgoth might yet contrive against them. Beingunwilling to make war upon him in Middle-earth, they remembered nonethelessthe ruin of Almaren; and they resolved that the like should not befall Valinor.Therefore at that time they fortified their land anew, and they raised up themountain-walls of the Pelori to sheer and dreadful heights, east, north, and south.Their outer sides were dark and smooth, without foothold or ledge, and they fellin great precipices with faces hard as glass, and rose up to towers with crowns ofwhite ice. A sleepless watch was set upon them, and no pass led through them,save only at the Calacirya: but that pass the Valar did not close, because of the
Eldar that were faithful, and in the city of Tirion upon the green hill Finarfin yetruled the remnant of the Noldor in the deep cleft of the mountains. For all thoseof elven-race, even the Vanyar and Ingwe their lord, must breathe at times theouter air and the wind that comes over the sea from the lands of their birth; andthe Valar would not sunder the Teleri wholly from their kin. But in the Calaciryathey set strong towers and many sentinels, and at its issue upon the plains ofValmar a host was encamped, so that neither bird nor beast nor elf nor man, norany creature beside that dwelt in Middle-earth, could pass that leaguer.
And in that time also, which songs call Nurtale Valinoreva, the Hiding ofValinor, the Enchanted Isles were set, and all the seas about them were filledwith shadows and bewilderment. And these isles were strung as a net in theShadowy Seas from the north to the south, before Tol Eressea, the Lonely Isle, isreached by one sailing west. Hardly might any vessel pass between them, for inthe dangerous sounds the waves sighed for ever upon dark rocks shrouded inmist. And in the twilight a great weariness came upon mariners and a loathing ofthe sea; but all that ever set foot upon the islands were there entrapped, and sleptuntil the Change of the World. Thus it was that as Mandos foretold to them inAraman the Blessed Realm was shut against the Noldor; and of the manymessengers that in after days sailed into the West none came ever to Valinor—save one only: the mightiest mariner of song.
CHAPTER 12
OF MEN
The Valar sat now behind their mountains at peace; and having given light toMiddle-earth they left it for long untended, and the lordship of Morgoth wasuncontested save by the valour of the Noldor. Most in mind Ulmo kept theexiles, who gathered news of the Earth through all the waters.
From this time forth were reckoned the Years of the Sun. Swifter and brieferare they than the long Years of the Trees in Valinor. In that time the air ofMiddle-earth became heavy with the breath of growth and mortality, and thechanging and ageing of all things was hastened exceedingly; life teemed uponthe soil and in the waters in the Second Spring of Arda, and the Eldar increased,and beneath the new Sun Beleriand grew green and fair.
At the first rising of the Sun the Younger Children of Iluvatar awoke in theland of Hildorien in the eastward regions of Middle-earth; but the first Sun arosein the West, and the opening eyes of Men were turned towards it, and their feetas they wandered over the Earth for the most part strayed that way. The Atanithey were named by the Eldar, the Second People; but they called them alsoHildor, the Followers, and many other names: Apanonar, the After-born,Engwar, the Sickly, and Firimar, the Mortals; and they named them the Usurpers,the Strangers, and the Inscrutable, the Self-cursed, the Heavy-handed, the Night-fearers, the Children of the Sun. Of Men little is told in these tales, whichconcern the Eldest Days before the waxing of mortals and the waning of theElves, save of those fathers of men, the Atanatari, who in the first years of theSun and Moon wandered into the North of the world. To Hildorien there came noVala to guide Men, or to summon them to dwell in Valinor; and Men have fearedthe Valar, rather than loved them, and have not understood the purposes of thePowers, being at variance with them, and at strife with the world. Ulmononetheless took thought for them, aiding the counsel and will of Manwe; andhis messages came often to them by stream and flood. But they have not skill insuch matters, and still less had they in those days before they had mingled withthe Elves. Therefore they loved the waters, and their hearts were stirred, but theyunderstood not the messages. Yet it is told that ere long they met Dark Elves inmany places, and were befriended by them; and Men became the companionsand disciples in their childhood of these ancient folk, wanderers of the Elven-race who never set out upon the paths to Valinor, and knew of the Valar only as arumour and a distant name.
Morgoth had then not long come back into Middle-earth, and his power wentnot far abroad, and was moreover checked by the sudden coming of great light.There was little peril in the lands and hills; and there new things, devised longages before in the thought of Yavanna and sown as seed in the dark, came at lastto their budding and their bloom. West, North, and South the children of Menspread and wandered, and their joy was the joy of the morning before the dew isdry, when every leaf is green.
But the dawn is brief and the day full often belies its promise; and now thetime drew on to the great wars of the powers of the North, when Noldor andSindar and Men strove against the hosts of Morgoth Bauglir, and went down inruin. To this end the cunning lies of Morgoth that he sowed of old, and sowedever anew among his foes, and the curse that came of the slaying at Alqualonde,and the oath of Feanor, were ever at work. Only a part is here told of the deeds ofthose days, and most is said of the Noldor, and the Silmarils, and the mortals thatbecame entangled in their fate. In those days Elves and Men were of like statureand strength of body, but the Elves had greater wisdom, and skill, and beauty;and those who had dwelt in Valinor and looked upon the Powers as muchsurpassed the Dark Elves in these things as they in turn surpassed the people ofmortal race. Only in the realm of Doriath, whose queen Melian was of thekindred of Valar, did the Sindar come near to match the Calaquendi of theBlessed Realm.
Immortal were the Elves, and their wisdom waxed from age to age, and nosickness nor pestilence brought death to them. Their bodies indeed were of thestuff of Earth, and could be destroyed; and in those days they were more like tothe bodies of Men, since they had not so long been inhabited by the fire of theirspirit, which consumes them from within in the courses of time. But Men weremore frail, more easily slain by weapon or mischance, and less easily healed;subject to sickness and many ills; and they grew old and died. What may befalltheir spirits after death the Elves know not. Some say that they too go to the hallsof Mandos; but their place of waiting there is not that of the Elves, and Mandosunder Iluvatar alone save Manwe knows whither they go after the time ofrecollection in those silent halls beside the Outer Sea. None have ever come backfrom the mansions of the dead, save only Beren son of Barahir, whose hand hadtouched a Silmaril; but he never spoke afterward to mortal Men. The fate of Menafter death, maybe, is not in the hands of the Valar, nor was all foretold in theMusic of the Ainur.
In after days, when because of the triumph of Morgoth Elves and Men becameestranged, as he most wished, those of the Elven-race that lived still in Middle-earth waned and faded, and Men usurped the sunlight. Then the Quendi
wandered in the lonely places of the great lands and the isles, and took to themoonlight and the starlight, and to the woods and caves, becoming as shadowsand memories, save those who ever and anon set sail into the West and vanishedfrom Middle-earth. But in the dawn of years Elves and Men were allies and heldthemselves akin, and there were some among Men that learned the wisdom ofthe Eldar, and became great and valiant among the captains of the Noldor. Andin the glory and beauty of the Elves, and in their fate, full share had the offspringof elf and mortal, Earendil, and Elwing, and Elrond their child.
CHAPTER 13
OF THE RETURN OF THE NOLDOR
It has been told that Feanor and his sons came first of the Exiles to Middle-earth,and landed in the waste of Lammoth, the Great Echo, upon the outer shores ofthe Firth of Drengist. And even as the Noldor set foot upon the strand their crieswere taken up into the hills and multiplied, so that a clamour as of countlessmighty voices filled all the coasts of the North; and the noise of the burning ofthe ships at Losgar went down the winds of the sea as a tumult of great wrath,and far away all who heard that sound were filled with wonder.
Now the flames of that burning were seen not only by Fingolfin, whomFeanor had deserted in Araman, but also by the Ores and the watchers ofMorgoth. No tale has told what Morgoth thought in his heart at the tidings thatFeanor, his bitterest foe, had brought a host out of the West. It may be that hefeared him little, for he had as yet no proof of the swords of the Noldor; andsoon it was seen that he purposed to drive them back into the sea.
Under the cold stars before the rising of the Moon the host of Feanor went upthe long Firth of Drengist that pierced the Echoing Hills of Ered Lomin, andpassed thus from the shores into the great land of Hithlum; and they came atlength to the long lake of Mithrim, and upon its northern shore made theirencampment in the region that bore the same name. But the host of Morgoth,aroused by the tumult of Lammoth and the light of the burning at Losgar, camethrough the passes of Ered Wethrin, the Mountains of Shadow, and assailedFeanor on a sudden, before his camp was full-wrought or put in defence; andthere on the grey fields of Mithrim was fought the Second Battle in the Wars ofBeleriand. Dagor-nuin-Giliath it is named, the Battle-under-Stars, for the Moonhad not yet risen; and it is renowned in song. The Noldor, outnumbered andtaken at unawares, were yet swiftly victorious; for the light of Aman was not yetdimmed in their eyes, and they were strong and swift, and deadly in anger, andtheir swords were long and terrible. The Ores fled before them, and they weredriven forth from Mithrim with great slaughter, and hunted over the Mountainsof Shadow into the great plain of Ard-galen, that lay northward of Dorthonion.There the armies of Morgoth that had passed south into the Vale of Sirion andbeleaguered Cirdan in the Havens of the Falas came up to their aid, and werecaught in their ruin. For Celegorm, Feanor’s son, having news of them, waylaidthem with a part of the Elven-host, and coming down upon them out of the hillsnear Eithel Sirion drove them into the Fen of Serech. Evil indeed were thetidings that came at last to Angband, and Morgoth was dismayed. Ten days thatbattle lasted, and from it returned of all the hosts that he had prepared for the
conquest of Beleriand no more than a handful of leaves.
Yet cause he had for great joy, though it was hidden from him for a while. ForFeanor, in his wrath against the Enemy, would not halt, but pressed on behindthe remnant of the Ores, thinking so to come at Morgoth himself; and he laughedaloud as he wielded his sword, rejoicing that he had dared the wrath of the Valarand the evils of the road, that he might see the hour of his vengeance. Nothingdid he know of Angband or the great strength of defence that Morgoth had soswiftly prepared; but even had he known it would not have deterred him, for hewas fey, consumed by the flame of his own wrath. Thus it was that he drew farahead of the van of his host; and seeing this the servants of Morgoth turned tobay, and there issued from Angband Balrogs to aid them. There upon theconfines of Dor Daedeloth, the land of Morgoth, Feanor was surrounded, withfew friends about him. Long he fought on, and undismayed, though he waswrapped in fire and wounded with many wounds; but at the last he was smittento the ground by Gothmog, Lord of Balrogs, whom Ecthelion after slew inGondolin. There he would have perished, had not his sons in that moment comeup with force to his aid; and the Balrogs left him, and departed to Angband.
Then his sons raised up their father and bore him back towards Mithrim. Butas they drew near to Eithel Sirion and were upon the upward path to the passover the mountains, Feanor bade them halt; for his wounds were mortal, and heknew that his hour was come. And looking out from the slopes of Ered Wethrinwith his last sight he beheld far off the peaks of Thangorodrim, mightiest of thetowers of Middle-earth, and knew with the foreknowledge of death that nopower of the Noldor would ever overthrow them; but he cursed the name ofMorgoth thrice, and laid it upon his sons to hold to their oath, and to avenge theirfather. Then he died; but he had neither burial nor tomb, for so fiery was hisspirit that as it sped his body fell to ash, and was borne away like smoke; and hislikeness has never again appeared in Arda, neither has his spirit left the halls ofMandos. Thus ended the mightiest of the Noldor, of whose deeds came boththeir greatest renown and their most grievous woe.
Now in Mithrim there dwelt Grey-elves, folk of Beleriand that had wanderednorth over the mountains, and the Noldor met them with gladness, as kinsfolklong sundered; but speech at first was not easy between them, for in their longseverance the tongues of the Calaquendi in Valinor and of the Moriquendi inBeleriand had drawn far apart. From the Elves of Mithrim the Noldor learned ofthe power of Elu Thingol, King in Doriath, and the girdle of enchantment thatfenced his realm; and tidings of these great deeds in the north came south toMenegroth, and to the havens of Brithombar and Eglarest. Then all the Elves ofBeleriand were filled with wonder and with hope at the coming of their mighty
kindred, who thus returned unlooked-for from the West in the very hour of theirneed, believing indeed at first that they came as emissaries of the Valar to deliverthem.
But even in the hour of the death of Feanor an embassy came to his sons fromMorgoth, acknowledging defeat, and offering terms, even to the surrender of aSilmaril. Then Maedhros the tall, the eldest son, persuaded his brothers to feignto treat with Morgoth, and to meet his emissaries at the place appointed; but theNoldor had as little thought of faith as had he. Wherefore each embassy camewith greater force than was agreed; but Morgoth sent the more, and there wereBalrogs. Maedhros was ambushed, and all his company were slain; but hehimself was taken alive by the command of Morgoth, and brought to Angband.
Then the brothers of Maedhros drew back, and fortified a great camp inHithlum; but Morgoth held Maedhros as hostage, and sent word that he wouldnot release him unless the Noldor would forsake their war, returning into theWest, or else departing far from Beleriand into the South of the world. But thesons of Feanor knew that Morgoth would betray them, and would not releaseMaedhros, whatsoever they might do; and they were constrained also by theiroath, and might not for any cause forsake the war against their Enemy. ThereforeMorgoth took Maedhros and hung him from the face of a precipice uponThangorodrim, and he was caught to the rock by the wrist of his right hand in aband of steel.
Now rumour came to the camp in Hithlum of the march of Fingolfin and thosethat followed him, who had crossed the Grinding Ice; and all the world lay thenin wonder at the coming of the Moon. But as the host of Fingolfin marched intoMithrim the Sun rose flaming in the West; and Fingolfin unfurled his blue andsilver banners, and blew his horns, and flowers sprang beneath his marchingfeet, and the ages of the stars were ended. At the uprising of the great light theservants of Morgoth fled into Angband, and Fingolfin passed unopposed throughthe fastness of Dor Daedeloth while his foes hid beneath the earth. Then theElves smote upon the gates of Angband, and the challenge of their trumpetsshook the towers of Thangorodrim; and Maedhros heard them amid his tormentand cried aloud, but his voice was lost in the echoes of the stone.
But Fingolfin, being of other temper than Feanor, and wary of the wiles ofMorgoth, withdrew from Dor Daedeloth and turned back towards Mithrim, forhe had heard tidings that there he should find the sons of Feanor, and he desiredalso to have the shield of the Mountains of Shadow while his people rested andgrew strong; for he had seen the strength of Angband, and thought not that it
would fall to the sound of trumpets only. Therefore coming at length to Hithlumhe made his first camp and dwelling by the northern shores of Lake Mithrim. Nolove was there in the hearts of those that followed Fingolfin for the House ofFeanor, for the agony of those that endured the crossing of the Ice had beengreat, and Fingolfin held the sons the accomplices of their father. Then there wasperil of strife between the hosts; but grievous as were their losses upon the road,the people of Fingolfin and of Finrod son of Finarfin were still more numerousthan the followers of Feanor, and these now withdrew before them, and removedtheir dwelling to the southern shore; and the lake lay between them. Many ofFeanor’s people indeed repented of the burning at Losgar, and were filled withamazement at the valour that had brought the friends whom they had abandonedover the Ice of the North; and they would have welcomed them, but they darednot, for shame.
Thus because of the curse that lay upon them the Noldor achieved nothing,while Morgoth hesitated, and the dread of light was new and strong upon theOres. But Morgoth arose from thought, and seeing the division of his foes helaughed. In the pits of Angband he caused vast smokes and vapours to be made,and they came forth from the reeking tops of the Iron Mountains, and afar offthey could be seen in Mithrim, staining the bright airs in the first mornings of theworld. A wind came out of the east, and bore them over Hithlum, darkening thenew Sun; and they fell, and coiled about the fields and hollows, and lay upon thewaters of Mithrim, drear and poisonous.
Then Fingon the valiant, son of Fingolfin, resolved to heal the feud thatdivided the Noldor, before their Enemy should be ready for war; for the earthtrembled in the Northlands with the thunder of the forges of Morgothunderground. Long before, in the bliss of Valinor, before Melkor was unchained,or lies came between them, Fingon had been close in friendship with Maedhros;and though he knew not yet that Maedhros had not forgotten him at the burningof the ships, the thought of their ancient friendship stung his heart. Therefore hedared a deed which is justly renowned among the feats of the princes of theNoldor: alone, and without the counsel of any, he set forth in search ofMaedhros; and aided by the very darkness that Morgoth had made he cameunseen into the fastness of his foes. High upon the shoulders of Thangorodrim heclimbed, and looked in despair upon the desolation of the land; but no passage orcrevice could he find through which he might come within Morgoth’sstronghold. Then in defiance of the Ores, who cowered still in the dark vaultsbeneath the earth, he took his harp and sang a song of Valinor that the Noldormade of old, before strife was born among the sons of Finwe; and his voice rangin the mournful hollows that had never heard before aught save cries of fear and
woe.
Thus Fingon found what he sought. For suddenly above him far and faint hissong was taken up, and a voice answering called to him. Maedhros it was thatsang amid his torment. But Fingon climbed to the foot of the precipice where hiskinsman hung, and then could go no further; and he wept when he saw the crueldevice of Morgoth. Maedhros therefore, being in anguish without hope, beggedFingon to shoot him with his bow; and Fingon strung an arrow, and bent his bow.And seeing no better hope he cried to Manwe, saying: ‘O King to whom all birdsare dear, speed now this feathered shaft, and recall some pity for the Noldor intheir need!’
His prayer was answered swiftly. For Manwe to whom all birds are dear, andto whom they bring news upon Taniquetil from Middle-earth, had sent forth therace of Eagles, commanding them to dwell in the crags of the North, and to keepwatch upon Morgoth; for Manwe still had pity for the exiled Elves. And theEagles brought news of much that passed in those days to the sad ears ofManwe. Now, even as Fingon bent his bow, there flew down from the high airsThorondor, King of Eagles, mightiest of all birds that have ever been, whoseoutstretched wings spanned thirty fathoms; and staying Fingon’s hand he tookhim up, and bore him to the face of the rock where Maedhros hung. But Fingoncould not release the hell-wrought bond upon his wrist, nor sever it, nor draw itfrom the stone. Again therefore in his pain Maedhros begged that he would slayhim; but Fingon cut off his hand above the wrist, and Thorondor bore them backto Mithrim.
There Maedhros in time was healed; for the fire of life was hot within him,and his strength was of the ancient world, such as those possessed who werenurtured in Valinor. His body recovered from his torment and became hale, butthe shadow of his pain was in his heart; and he lived to wield his sword with lefthand more deadly than his right had been. By this deed Fingon won greatrenown, and all the Noldor praised him; and the hatred between the houses ofFingolfin and Feanor was assuaged. For Maedhros begged forgiveness for thedesertion in Araman; and he waived his claim to kingship over all the Noldor,saying to Fingolfin: Tf there lay no grievance between us, lord, still the kingshipwould rightly come to you, the eldest here of the house of Finwe, and not theleast wise.’ But to this his brothers did not all in their hearts agree.
Therefore even as Mandos foretold the House of Feanor were called theDispossessed, because the overlordship passed from it, the elder, to the house ofFingolfin, both in Elende and in Beleriand, and because also of the loss of theSilmarils. But the Noldor being again united set a watch upon the borders of DorDaedeloth, and Angband was beleaguered from west, and south, and east; and
they sent forth messengers far and wide to explore the countries of Beleriand,and to treat with the people that dwelt there.
Now King Thingol welcomed not with a full heart the coming of so manyprinces in might out of the West, eager for new realms; and he would not openhis kingdom, nor remove its girdle of enchantment, for wise with the wisdom ofMelian he trusted not that the restraint of Morgoth would endure. Alone of theprinces of the Noldor those of Finarfin’s house were suffered to pass within theconfines of Doriath; for they could claim close kinship with King Thingolhimself, since their mother was Earwen of Alqualonde, Olwe’s daughter.
Angrod son of Finarfin was the first of the Exiles to come to Menegroth, asmessenger of his brother Finrod, and he spoke long with the King, telling him ofthe deeds of the Noldor in the north, and of their numbers, and of the ordering oftheir force; but being true, and wisehearted, and thinking all griefs now forgiven,he spoke no word concerning the kinslaying, nor of the manner of the exile ofthe Noldor and the oath of Feanor. King Thingol hearkened to the words ofAngrod; and ere he went he said to him: Thus shall you speak for me to thosethat sent you. In Hithlum the Noldor have leave to dwell, and in the highlands ofDorthonion, and in the lands east of Doriath that are empty and wild; butelsewhere there are many of my people, and I would not have them restrained oftheir freedom, still less ousted from their homes. Beware therefore how youprinces of the West bear yourselves; for I am the Lord of Beleriand, and all whoseek to dwell there shall hear my word. Into Doriath none shall come to abidebut only such as I call as guests, or who seek me in great need.’
Now the lords of the Noldor held council in Mithrim, and thither cameAngrod out of Doriath, bearing the message of King Thingol. Cold seemed itswelcome to the Noldor, and the sons of Feanor were angered at the words; butMaedhros laughed, saying: ‘A king is he that can hold his own, or else his title isvain. Thingol does but grant us lands where his power does not run. IndeedDoriath alone would be his realm this day, but for the coming of the Noldor.Therefore in Doriath let him reign, and be glad that he has the sons of Finwe forhis neighbours, not the Ores of Morgoth that we found. Elsewhere it shall go asseems good to us.’
But Caranthir, who loved not the sons of Finarfin, and was the harshest of thebrothers and the most quick to anger, cried aloud: ‘Yea more! Let not the sons ofFinarfin run hither and thither with their tales to this Dark Elf in his caves! Whomade them our spokesmen to deal with him? And though they be come indeed toBeleriand, let them not so swiftly forget that their father is a lord of the Noldor,though their mother be of other kin.’
Then Angrod was wrathful and went forth from the council. Maedhros indeed
rebuked Caranthir; but the greater part of the Noldor, of both followings, hearinghis words were troubled in heart, fearing the fell spirit of the sons of Feanor thatit seemed would ever be like to burst forth in rash word or violence. ButMaedhros restrained his brothers, and they departed from the council, and soonafterwards they left Mithrim and went eastward beyond Aros to the wide landsabout the Hill of Himring. That region was named thereafter the March ofMaedhros; for northwards there was little defence of hill or river against assaultfrom Angband. There Maedhros and his brothers kept watch, gathering all suchpeople as would come to them, and they had few dealings with their kinsfolkwestward, save at need. It is said indeed that Maedhros himself devised this plan,to lessen the chances of strife, and because he was very willing that the chiefperil of assault should fall upon himself; and he remained for his part infriendship with the houses of Fingolfin and Finarfin, and would come amongthem at times for common counsel. Yet he also was bound by the oath, though itslept now for a time.
Now the people of Caranthir dwelt furthest east beyond the upper waters ofGelion, about Lake Helevorn under Mount Rerir and to the southward; and theyclimbed the heights of Ered Luin and looked eastward in wonder, for wild andwide it seemed to them were the lands of Middle-earth. And thus it was thatCaranthir’s people came upon the Dwarves, who after the onslaught of Morgothand the coming of the Noldor had ceased their traffic into Beleriand. But thougheither people loved skill and were eager to learn, no great love was therebetween them; for the Dwarves were secret and quick to resentment, andCaranthir was haughty and scarce concealed his scorn for the unloveliness of theNaugrim, and his people followed their lord. Nevertheless since both peoplesfeared and hated Morgoth they made alliance, and had of it great profit; for theNaugrim learned many secrets of craft in those days, so that the smiths andmasons of Nogrod and Belegost became renowned among their kin, and whenthe Dwarves began again to journey into Beleriand all the traffic of the dwarf-mines passed first through the hands of Caranthir, and thus great riches came tohim.
When twenty years of the Sun had passed, Fingolfin King of the Noldor madea great feast; and it was held in the spring near to the pools of Ivrin, whence theswift river Narog rose, for there the lands were green and fair at the feet of theMountains of Shadow that shielded them from the north. The joy of that feastwas long remembered in later days of sorrow; and it was called MerethAderthad, the Feast of Reuniting. Thither came many of the chieftains and
people of Fingolfin and Finrod; and of the sons of Feanor Maedhros and Maglor,with warriors of the eastern March; and there came also great numbers of theGrey-elves, wanderers of the woods of Beleriand and folk of the Havens, withClrdan their lord. There came even Green-elves from Ossiriand, the Land ofSeven Rivers, far off under the walls of the Blue Mountains; but out of Doriaththere came but two messengers, Mablung and Daeron, bearing greetings fromthe King.
At Mereth Aderthad many counsels were taken in good will, and oaths weresworn of league and friendship; and it is told that at this feast the tongue of theGrey-elves was most spoken even by the Noldor, for they learned swiftly thespeech of Beleriand, whereas the Sindar were slow to master the tongue ofValinor. The hearts of the Noldor were high and full of hope, and to many amongthem it seemed that the words of Feanor had been justified, bidding them seekfreedom and fair kingdoms in Middle-earth; and indeed there followed after longyears of peace, while their swords fenced Beleriand from the ruin of Morgoth,and his power was shut behind his gates. In those days there was joy beneath thenew Sun and Moon, and all the land was glad; but still the Shadow brooded inthe north.
And when again thirty years had passed, Turgon son of Fingolfin left Nevrastwhere he dwelt and sought out Finrod his friend upon the island of Tol Sirion,and they journeyed southward along the river, being weary for a while of thenorthern mountains; and as they journeyed night came upon them beyond theMeres of Twilight beside the waters of Sirion, and they slept upon his banksbeneath the summer stars. But Ulmo coming up the river laid a deep sleep uponthem and heavy dreams; and the trouble of the dreams remained after theyawoke, but neither said aught to the other, for their memory was not clear, andeach believed that Ulmo had sent a message to him alone. But unquiet was uponthem ever after, and doubt of what should befall, and they wandered often alonein untrodden lands, seeking far and wide for places of hidden strength; for itseemed to each that he was bidden to prepare for a day of evil, and to establish aretreat, lest Morgoth should burst from Angband and overthrow the armies of theNorth.
Now on a time Finrod and Galadriel his sister were the guests of Thingol theirkinsman in Doriath. Then Finrod was filled with wonder at the strength andmajesty of Menegroth, its treasuries and armouries and its many-pillared halls ofstone; and it came into his heart that he would build wide halls behind ever-guarded gates in some deep and secret place beneath the hills. Therefore heopened his heart to Thingol, telling him of his dreams; and Thingol spoke to himof the deep gorge of the River Narog, and the caves under the High Faroth in its
steep western shore, and when he departed he gave him guides to lead him tothat place of which few yet knew. Thus Finrod came to the Caverns of Narog,and began to establish there deep halls and armouries after the fashion of themansions of Menegroth; and that stronghold was called Nargothrond. In thatlabour Finrod was aided by the Dwarves of the Blue Mountains; and they wererewarded well, for Finrod had brought more treasures out of Tirion than anyother of the princes of the Noldor. And in that time was made for him theNauglamir, the Necklace of the Dwarves, most renowned of their works in theElder Days. It was a carcanet of gold, and set therein were gems uncounted fromValinor; but it had a power within it so that it rested lightly on its wearer as astrand of flax, and whatsoever neck it clasped it sat always with grace andloveliness.
There in Nargothrond Finrod made his home with many of his people, and hewas named in the tongue of the Dwarves Felagund, Hewer of Caves; and thatname he bore thereafter until his end. But Finrod Felagund was not the first todwell in the caves beside the River Narog.
Galadriel his sister went not with him to Nargothrond, for in Doriath dweltCeleborn, kinsman of Thingol, and there was great love between them.Therefore she remained in the Hidden Kingdom, and abode with Melian, and ofher learned great lore and wisdom concerning Middle-earth.
But Turgon remembered the city set upon a hill, Tirion the fair with its towerand tree, and he found not what he sought, but returned to Nevrast, and sat inpeace in Vinyamar by the shores of the sea. And in the next year Ulmo himselfappeared to him, and bade him go forth again alone into the Vale of Sirion; andTurgon went forth, and by the guidance of Ulmo he discovered the hidden valeof Tumladen in the Encircling Mountains, in the midst of which there was a hillof stone. Of this he spoke to none as yet, but returned once more to Nevrast, andthere began in his secret counsels to devise the plan of a city after the manner ofTirion upon Tuna, for which his heart yearned in exile.
Now Morgoth, believing the report of his spies that the lords of the Noldorwere wandering abroad with little thought of war, made trial of the strength andwatchfulness of his enemies. Once more, with little warning, his might wasstirred, and suddenly there were earthquakes in the north, and fire came fromfissures in the earth, and the Iron Mountains vomited flame; and Ores pouredforth across the plain of Ard-galen. Thence they thrust down the Pass of Sirionin the west, and in the east they burst through the land of Maglor, in the gapbetween the hills of Maedhros and the outliers of the Blue Mountains. ButFingolfin and Maedhros were not sleeping, and while others sought out thescattered bands of Ores that strayed in Beleriand and did great evil they came
upon the main host from either side as it was assaulting Dorthonion; and theydefeated the servants of Morgoth, and pursuing them across Ard-galen destroyedthem utterly, to the least and last, within sight of Angband’s gates. That was thethird great battle of the Wars of Beleriand, and it was named Dagor Aglareb, theGlorious Battle.
A victory it was, and yet a warning; and the princes took heed of it, andthereafter drew closer their leaguer, and strengthened and ordered their watch,setting the Siege of Angband, which lasted wellnigh four hundred years of theSun. For a long time after Dagor Aglareb no servant of Morgoth would venturefrom his gates, for they feared the lords of the Noldor; and Fingolfin boasted thatsave by treason among themselves Morgoth could never again burst from theleaguer of the Eldar, nor come upon them at unawares. Yet the Noldor could notcapture Angband, nor could they regain the Silmarils; and war never whollyceased in all that time of the Siege, for Morgoth devised new evils, and ever andanon he would make trial of his enemies. Nor could the stronghold of Morgothbe ever wholly encircled; for the Iron Mountains, from whose great curving wallthe towers of Thangorodrim were thrust forward, defended it upon either side,and were impassable to the Noldor, because of their snow and ice. Thus in hisrear and to the north Morgoth had no foes, and by that way his spies at timeswent out, and came by devious routes into Beleriand. And desiring above all tosow fear and disunion among the Eldar, he commanded the Ores to take aliveany of them that they could and bring them bound to Angband; and some he sodaunted by the terror of his eyes that they needed no chains more, but walkedever in fear of him, doing his will wherever they might be. Thus Morgothlearned much of all that had befallen since the rebellion of Feanor, and herejoiced, seeing therein the seed of many dissensions among his foes.
When nearly one hundred years had run since the Dagor Aglareb, Morgothendeavoured to take Fingolfin at unawares (for he knew of the vigilance ofMaedhros); and he sent forth an army into the white north, and they turned westand again south and came down the coasts to the Firth of Drengist, by the routethat Fingolfin followed from the Grinding Ice. Thus they would enter into therealm of Hithlum from the west; but they were espied in time, and Fingon fellupon them among the hills at the head of the Firth, and most of the Ores weredriven into the sea. This was not reckoned among the great battles, for the Oreswere not in great number, and only a part of the people of Hithlum fought there.But thereafter there was peace for many years, and no open assault fromAngband, for Morgoth perceived now that the Ores unaided were no match forthe Noldor; and he sought in his heart for new counsel.
Again after a hundred years Glaurung, the first of the Uruloki, the fire-drakesof the North, issued from Angband’s gates by night. He was yet young andscarce half-grown, for long and slow is the life of the dragons, but the Elves fledbefore him to Ered Wethrin and Dorthonion in dismay; and he defiled the fieldsof Ard-galen. Then Fingon prince of Hithlum rode against him with archers onhorseback, and hemmed him round with a ring of swift riders; and Glaurungcould not endure their darts, being not yet come to his full armoury, and he fledback to Angband, and came not forth again for many years. Fingon won greatpraise, and the Noldor rejoiced; for few foresaw the full meaning and threat ofthis new thing. But Morgoth was ill-pleased that Glaurung had disclosed himselfoversoon; and after his defeat there was the Long Peace of wellnigh two hundredyears. In all that time there were but affrays on the marches, and all Beleriandprospered and grew rich. Behind the guard of their armies in the north theNoldor built their dwellings and their towers, and many fair things they made inthose days, and poems and histories and books of lore. In many parts of the landthe Noldor and the Sindar became welded into one people, and spoke the sametongue; though this difference remained between them, that the Noldor had thegreater power of mind and body, and were the mightier warriors and sages, andthey built with stone, and loved the hill-slopes and open lands. But the Sindarhad the fairer voices and were more skilled in music, save only Maglor son ofFeanor, and they loved the woods and the riversides; and some of the Grey-elvesstill wandered far and wide without settled abode, and they sang as they went.
CHAPTER 14
OF BELERIAND AND ITS REALMS
This is the fashion of the lands into which the Noldor came, in the north of thewestern regions of Middle-earth, in the ancient days; and here also is told of themanner in which the chieftains of the Eldar held their lands and the leaguer uponMorgoth after the Dagor Aglareb, the third battle in the Wars of Beleriand.
In the north of the world Melkor had in the ages past reared Ered Engrin, theIron Mountains, as a fence to his citadel of Utumno; and they stood upon theborders of the regions of everlasting cold, in a great curve from east to west.Behind the walls of Ered Engrin in the west, where they bent back northwards,Melkor built another fortress, as a defence against assault that might come fromValinor; and when he came back to Middle-earth, as has been told, he took uphis abode in the endless dungeons of Angband, the Hells of Iron, for in the Warof the Powers the Valar, in their haste to overthrow him in his great stronghold ofUtumno, did not wholly destroy Angband nor search out all its deep places.Beneath Ered Engrin he made a great tunnel, which issued south of themountains; and there he made a mighty gate. But above this gate, and behind iteven to the mountains, he piled the thunderous towers of Thangorodrim, thatwere made of the ash and slag of his subterranean furnaces, and the vast refuseof his tunnellings. They were black and desolate and exceedingly lofty; andsmoke issued from their tops, dark and foul upon the northern sky. Before thegates of Angband filth and desolation spread southward for many miles over thewide plain of Ard-galen; but after the coming of the Sun rich grass arose there,and while Angband was besieged and its gates shut there were green things evenamong the pits and broken rocks before the doors of hell.
To the west of Thangorodrim lay Hisilome, the Land of Mist, for so it wasnamed by the Noldor in their own tongue because of the clouds that Morgothsent thither during their first encampment; Hithlum it became in the tongue ofthe Sindar that dwelt in those regions. It was a fair land while the Siege ofAngband lasted, although its air was cool and winter there was cold. In the westit was bounded by Ered Lomin, the Echoing Mountains that marched near thesea; and in the east and south by the great curve of Ered Wethrin, the ShadowyMountains, that looked across Ard-galen and the Vale of Sirion.
Fingolfin and Fingon his son held Hithlum, and the most part of Fingolfin’sfolk dwelt in Mithrim about the shores of the great lake; to Fingon was assignedDor-lomin, that lay to the west of the Mountains of Mithrim. But their chief
fortress was at Eithel Sirion in the east of Ered Wethrin, whence they kept watchupon Ard-galen; and their cavalry rode upon that plain even to the shadow ofThangorodrim, for from few their horses had increased swiftly, and the grass ofArd-galen was rich and green. Of those horses many of the sires came fromValinor, and they were given to Fingolfin by Maedhros in atonement of hislosses, for they had been carried by ship to Losgar.
West of Dor-lomin, beyond the Echoing Mountains, which south of the Firthof Drengist marched inland, lay Nevrast, that signifies the Hither Shore in theSindarin tongue. That name was given at first to all the coastlands south of theFirth, but afterwards only to the land whose shores lay between Drengist andMount Taras. There for many years was the realm of Turgon the wise, son ofFingolfin, bounded by the sea, and by Ered Fomin, and by the hills whichcontinued the walls of Ered Wethrin westward, from Ivrin to Mount Taras, whichstood upon a promontory. By some Nevrast was held to belong rather toBeleriand than to Hithlum, for it was a milder land, watered by the wet windsfrom the sea and sheltered from the cold north winds that blew over Hithlum. Itwas a hollow land, surrounded by mountains and great coast-cliffs higher thanthe plains behind, and no river flowed thence; and there was a great mere in themidst of Nevrast, with no certain shores, being encircled by wide marshes.Finaewen was the name of that mere, because of the multitude of birds thatdwelt there, of such as love tall reeds and shallow pools. At the coming of theNoldor many of the Grey-elves lived in Nevrast near to the coasts, and especiallyabout Mount Taras in the southwest; for to that place Ulmo and Osse had beenwont to come in days of old. All that people took Turgon for their lord, and themingling of the Noldor and the Sindar came to pass soonest there; and Turgondwelt long in those halls that he named Vinyamar, under Mount Taras beside thesea.
South of Ard-galen the great highland named Dorthonion stretched for sixtyleagues from west to east; great pine forests it bore, especially on its northernand western sides. By gentle slopes from the plain it rose to a bleak and loftyland, where lay many tarns at the feet of bare tors whose heads were higher thanthe peaks of Ered Wethrin: but southward where it looked towards Doriath it fellsuddenly in dreadful precipices. From the northern slopes of Dorthonion Angrodand Aegnor, sons of Finarfin, looked out over the fields of Ard-galen, and werethe vassals of their brother Finrod, lord of Nargothrond; their people were few,for the land was barren, and the great highlands behind were deemed to be abulwark that Morgoth would not lightly seek to cross.
Between Dorthonion and the Shadowy Mountains there was a narrow vale,whose sheer walls were clad with pines; but the vale itself was green, for the
River Sirion flowed through it, hastening towards Beleriand. Finrod held thePass of Sirion, and upon the isle of Tol Sirion in the midst of the river he built amighty watch-tower, Minas Tirith; but after Nargothrond was made hecommitted that fortress mostly to the keeping of Orodreth his brother.
Now the great and fair country of Beleriand lay on either side of the mightyriver Sirion, renowned in song, which rose at Eithel Sirion and skirted the edgeof Ard-galen ere he plunged through the pass, becoming ever fuller with thestreams of the mountains. Thence he flowed south for one hundred and thirtyleagues, gathering the waters of many tributaries, until with a mighty flood hereached his many mouths and sandy delta in the Bay of Balar. And followingSirion from north to south there lay upon the right hand in West Beleriand theForest of Brethil between Sirion and Teiglin, and then the realm of Nargothrond,between Teiglin and Narog. And the River Narog rose in the falls of Ivrin in thesouthern face of Dor-lomin, and flowed some eighty leagues ere he joined Sirionin Nan-tathren, the Land of Willows. South of Nan-tathren was a region ofmeads filled with many flowers, where few folk dwelt; and beyond lay themarshes and isles of reed about the mouths of Sirion, and the sands of his deltaempty of all living things save birds of the sea.
But the realm of Nargothrond extended also west of Narog to the RiverNenning, that reached the sea at Eglarest; and Finrod became the overlord of allthe Elves of Beleriand between Sirion and the sea, save only in the Falas. Theredwelt those of the Sindar who still loved ships, and Cirdan the shipbuilder wastheir lord; but between Cirdan and Finrod there was friendship and alliance, andwith the aid of the Noldor the havens of Brithombar and Eglarest were builtanew. Behind their great walls they became fair towns and harbours with quaysand piers of stone. Upon the cape west of Eglarest Finrod raised the tower ofBarad Nimras to watch the western sea, though needlessly, as it proved; for at notime ever did Morgoth essay to build ships or to make war by sea. Water all hisservants shunned, and to the sea none would willingly go nigh, save in dire need.With the aid of the Elves of the Havens some of the folk of Nargothrond builtnew ships, and they went forth and explored the great Isle of Balar, thinkingthere to prepare a last refuge, if evil came; but it was not their fate that theyshould ever dwell there.
Thus the realm of Finrod was the greatest by far, though he was the youngestof the great lords of the Noldor, Fingolfin, Fingon, and Maedhros, and FinrodFelagund. But Fingolfin was held overlord of all the Noldor, and Fingon afterhim, though their own realm was but the northern land of Hithlum; yet theirpeople were the most hardy and valiant, most feared by the Ores and most hatedby Morgoth.
Upon the left hand of Sirion lay East Beleriand, at its widest a hundredleagues from Sirion to Gelion and the borders of Ossiriand; and first, betweenSirion and Mindeb, lay the empty land of Dimbar under the peaks of theCrissaegrim, abode of eagles. Between Mindeb and the upper waters ofEsgalduin lay the no-land of Nan Dungortheb; and that region was filled withfear, for upon its one side the power of Melian fenced the north march ofDoriath, but upon the other side the sheer precipices of Ered Gorgoroth,Mountains of Terror, fell down from high Dorthonion. Thither, as was earliertold, Ungoliant had fled from the whips of the Balrogs, and there she dwelt awhile, filling the ravines with her deadly gloom, and there still, when she hadpassed away, her foul offspring lurked and wove their evil nets; and the thinwaters that spilled from Ered Gorgoroth were defiled, and perilous to drink, forthe hearts of those that tasted them were filled with shadows of madness anddespair. All living things else shunned that land, and the Noldor would passthrough Nan Dungortheb only at great need, by paths near to the borders ofDoriath and furthest from the haunted hills. That way was made long before, inthe time ere Morgoth returned to Middle-earth; and if one fared upon it he cameeastwards to Esgalduin, where still there stood in the days of the Siege the stonebridge of Iant Iaur. Thence he passed through Dor Dinen, the Silent Land, andcrossing the Arossiach (which signifies the Fords of Aros) came to the northmarches of Beleriand, where dwelt the sons of Feanor.
Southward lay the guarded woods of Doriath, abode of Thingol the HiddenKing, into whose realm none passed save by his will. Its northern and lesser part,the Forest of Neldoreth, was bounded east and south by the dark river Esgalduin,which bent westward in the midst of the land; and between Aros and Esgalduinlay the denser and greater woods of Region. Upon the southern bank ofEsgalduin, where it turned westward towards Sirion, were the Caves ofMenegroth; and all Doriath lay east of Sirion save for a narrow region ofwoodland between the meeting of Teiglin and Sirion and the Meres of Twilight.By the people of Doriath this wood was called Nivrim, the West March; greatoak-trees grew there, and it also was encompassed within the Girdle of Melian,that so some portion of Sirion which she loved in reverence of Ulmo should bewholly under the power of Thingol.
In the south-west of Doriath, where Aros flowed into Sirion, lay great poolsand marshes on either side of the river, which halted there in his course andstrayed in many channels. That region was named Aelin-uial, the TwilightMeres, for they were wrapped in mists, and the enchantment of Doriath lay overthem. Now all the northern part of Beleriand sloped southward to this point andthen for a while was plain, and the flood of Sirion was stayed. But south of
Aelin-uial the land fell suddenly and steeply; and all the lower fields of Sirionwere divided from the upper fields by this fall, which to one looking from thesouth northward appeared as an endless chain of hills running from Eglarestbeyond Narog in the west to Amon Ereb in the east, within far sight of Gelion.Narog came through these hills in a deep gorge, and flowed over rapids but hadno fall, and on its western bank the land rose into the great wooded highlands ofTauren-Faroth. On the west side of this gorge, where the short and foamingstream Ringwil tumbled headlong into Narog from the High Faroth, Finrodestablished Nargothrond. But some twenty-five leagues east of the gorge ofNargothrond Sirion fell from the north in a mighty fall below the Meres, andthen he plunged suddenly underground into great tunnels that the weight of hisfalling waters delved; and he issued again three leagues southward with greatnoise and smoke through rocky arches at the foot of the hills which were calledthe Gates of Sirion.
This dividing fall was named Andram, the Fong Wall, from Nargothrond toRamdal, the Wall’s End, in East Beleriand. But in the east it became ever lesssheer, for the vale of Gelion sloped steadily southward, and Gelion had neitherfall nor rapids throughout his course, but was ever swifter than was Sirion.Between Ramdal and Gelion there stood a single hill of great extent and gentleslopes, but seeming mightier than it was, for it stood alone; and that hill wasnamed Amon Ereb. Upon Amon Ereb died Denethor, lord of the Nandor thatdwelt in Ossiriand, who marched to the aid of Thingol against Morgoth in thosedays when the Ores first came down in force, and broke the starlit peace ofBeleriand; and upon that hill Maedhros dwelt after the great defeat. But south ofthe Andram, between Sirion and Gelion, was a wild land of tangled forest inwhich no folk went, save here and there a few Dark Elves wandering; Taur-im-Duinath it was named, the Forest between the Rivers.
Gelion was a great river; and he rose in two sources and had at first twobranches: Little Gelion that came from the Hill of Himring, and Greater Gelionthat came from Mount Rerir. From the meeting of his arms he flowed south forforty leagues before he found his tributaries; and before he found the sea he wastwice as long as Sirion, though less wide and full, for more rain fell in Hithlumand Dorthonion, whence Sirion drew his waters, than in the east. From EredLuin flowed the six tributaries of Gelion: Ascar (that was after namedRathloriel), Thalos, Legolin, Brilthor, Duilwen, and Adurant, swift and turbulentstreams, falling steeply from the mountains; and between Ascar in the north andAdurant in the south, and between Gelion and Ered Luin, lay the far green
country of Ossiriand, the Land of Seven Rivers. Now at a point nearly midwayin its course the stream of Adurant divided and then joined again; and the islandthat its waters enclosed was named Tol Galen, the Green Isle. There Beren andLiithien dwelt after their return.
In Ossiriand dwelt the Green-elves, in the protection of their rivers; for afterSirion Ulmo loved Gelion above all the waters of the western world. Thewoodcraft of the Elves of Ossiriand was such that a stranger might pass throughtheir land from end to end and see none of them. They were clad in green inspring and summer, and the sound of their singing could be heard even acrossthe waters of Gelion; wherefore the Noldor named that country Lindon, the landof music, and the mountains beyond they named Ered Lindon, for they first sawthem from Ossiriand.
East of Dorthonion the marches of Beleriand were most open to attack, andonly hills of no great height guarded the vale of Gelion from the north. In thatregion, upon the March of Maedhros and in the lands behind, dwelt the sons ofFeanor with many people; and their riders passed often over the vast northernplain, Lothlann the wide and empty, east of Ard-galen, lest Morgoth shouldattempt any sortie towards East Beleriand. The chief citadel of Maedhros wasupon the Hill of Himring, the Ever-cold; and that was wide-shouldered, bare oftrees, and flat upon its summit, surrounded by many lesser hills. BetweenHimring and Dorthonion there was a pass, exceeding steep upon the west, andthat was the Pass of Aglon, and was a gate unto Doriath; and a bitter wind blewever through it from the north. But Celegorm and Curufin fortified Aglon andheld it with great strength, and all the land of Himlad southward between theRiver Aros that rose in Dorthonion and his tributary Celon that came fromHimring.
Between the arms of Gelion was the ward of Maglor, and here in one place thehills failed altogether; there it was that the Ores came into East Beleriand beforethe Third Battle. Therefore the Noldor held strength of cavalry in the plains atthat place; and the people of Caranthir fortified the mountains to the east ofMaglor’s Gap. There Mount Rerir, and about it many lesser heights, stood outfrom the main range of Ered Lindon westward; and in the angle between Rerirand Ered Lindon there was a lake, shadowed by mountains on all sides save thesouth. That was Lake Helevorn, deep and dark, and beside it Caranthir had hisabode; but all the great land between Gelion and the mountains, and betweenRerir and the River Ascar, was called by the Noldor Thargelion, which signifiesthe Land beyond Gelion, or Dor Caranthir, the Land of Caranthir; and it was here
that the Noldor first met the Dwarves. But Thargelion was before called by theGrey-elves Talath Rhunen, the East Vale.
Thus the sons of Feanor under Maedhros were the lords of East Beleriand, buttheir people were in that time mostly in the north of the land, and southward theyrode only to hunt in the greenwoods. But there Amrod and Amras had theirabode, and they came seldom northward while the Siege lasted; and there alsoother of the Elf-lords would ride at times, even from afar, for the land was wildbut very fair. Of these Finrod Felagund came most often, for he had great love ofwandering, and he came even into Ossiriand, and won the friendship of theGreen-elves. But none of the Noldor went ever over Ered Lindon, while theirrealm lasted; and little news and late came into Beleriand of what passed in theregions of the East.
CHAPTER 15
OF THE NOLDQR IN BELERIAND
It has been told how by the guidance of Ulmo Turgon of Nevrast discovered thehidden vale of Tumladen; and that (as was after known) lay east of the upperwaters of Sirion, in a ring of mountains tall and sheer, and no living thing camethere save the eagles of Thorondor. But there was a deep way under themountains delved in the darkness of the world by waters that flowed out to jointhe streams of Sirion; and this way Turgon found, and so came to the green plainamid the mountains, and saw the island-hill that stood there of hard smoothstone; for the vale had been a great lake in ancient days. Then Turgon knew thathe had found the place of his desire, and he resolved to build there a fair city, amemorial of Tirion upon Tuna; but he returned to Nevrast, and remained there inpeace, though he pondered ever in his thought how he should accomplish hisdesign.
Now after the Dagor Aglareb the unquiet that Ulmo set in his heart returned tohim, and he summoned many of the hardiest and most skilled of his people, andled them secretly to the hidden vale, and there they began the building of the citythat Turgon had devised; and they set a watch all about it, that none might comeupon their work from without, and the power of Ulmo that ran in Sirionprotected them. But Turgon dwelt still for the most part in Nevrast, until it cameto pass that at last the city was full-wrought, after two and fifty years of secrettoil. It is said that Turgon appointed its name to be Ondolinde in the speech ofthe Elves of Valinor, the Rock of the Music of Water, for there were fountainsupon the hill; but in the Sindarin tongue the name was changed, and it becameGondolin, the Hidden Rock. Then Turgon prepared to depart from Nevrast andleave his halls in Vinyamar beside the sea; and there Ulmo came to him onceagain, and spoke with him. And he said: ‘Now thou shalt go at last to Gondolin,Turgon; and I will maintain my power in the Vale of Sirion, and in all the waterstherein, so that none shall mark thy going, nor shall any find there the hiddenentrance against thy will. Longest of all the realms of the Eldalie shall Gondolinstand against Melkor. But love not too well the work of thy hands and thedevices of thy heart; and remember that the true hope of the Noldor lieth in theWest and cometh from the Sea.’
And Ulmo warned Turgon that he also lay under the Doom of Mandos, whichUlmo had no power to remove. ‘Thus it may come to pass,’ he said, ‘that thecurse of the Noldor shall find thee too ere the end, and treason awake within thywalls. Then they shall be in peril of fire. But if this peril draweth nigh indeed,then even from Nevrast one shall come to warn thee, and from him beyond ruin
and fire hope shall be born for Elves and Men. Leave therefore in this housearms and a sword, that in years to come he may find them, and thus shalt thouknow him, and not be deceived.’ And Ulmo declared to Turgon of what kind andstature should be the helm and mail and sword that he left behind.
Then Ulmo returned to the sea, and Turgon sent forth all his people, even to athird part of the Noldor of Fingolfin’s following, and a yet greater host of theSindar; and they passed away, company by company, secretly, under theshadows of Ered Wethrin, and they came unseen to Gondolin, and none knewwhither they had gone. And last of all Turgon arose, and went with hishousehold silently through the hills, and passed the gates in the mountains, andthey were shut behind him.
Through many long years none passed inward thereafter, save Hurin and Huoronly; and the host of Turgon came never forth again until the Year ofLamentation after three hundred and fifty years and more. But behind the circleof the mountains the people of Turgon grew and throve, and they put forth theirskill in labour unceasing, so that Gondolin upon Amon Gwareth became fairindeed and fit to compare even with Elven Tirion beyond the sea. High andwhite were its walls, and smooth its stairs, and tall and strong was the Tower ofthe King. There shining fountains played, and in the courts of Turgon stoodimages of the Trees of old, which Turgon himself wrought with elven-craft; andthe Tree which he made of gold was named Glingal, and the Tree whose flowershe made of silver was named Belthil. But fairer than all the wonders of Gondolinwas Idril, Turgon’s daughter, she that was called Celebrindal, the Silver-foot,whose hair was as the gold of Laurelin before the coming of Melkor. ThusTurgon lived long in bliss; but Nevrast was desolate, and remained empty ofliving folk until the ruin of Beleriand.
Now while the city of Gondolin was building in secret, Finrod Felagundwrought in the deep places of Nargothrond; but Galadriel his sister dwelt, as hasbeen told, in Thingol’s realm in Doriath. And at times Melian and Galadrielwould speak together of Valinor and the bliss of old; but beyond the dark hour ofthe death of the Trees Galadriel would not go, but ever fell silent. And on a timeMelian said: There is some woe that lies upon you and your kin. That I can seein you, but all else is hidden from me; for by no vision or thought can I perceiveanything that passed or passes in the West: a shadow lies over all the land ofAman, and reaches far out over the sea. Why will you not tell me more?’
Tor that woe is past,’ said Galadriel; ‘and I would take what joy is here left,untroubled by memory. And maybe there is woe enough yet to come, though still
hope may seem bright.’
Then Melian looked in her eyes, and said: T believe not that the Noldor cameforth as messengers of the Valar, as was said at first: not though they came in thevery hour of our need. For they speak never of the Valar, nor have their highlords brought any message to Thingol, whether from Manwe, or Ulmo, or evenfrom Olwe the King’s brother, and his own folk that went over the sea. For whatcause, Galadriel, were the high people of the Noldor driven forth as exiles fromAman? Or what evil lies on the sons of Feanor that they are so haughty and sofell? Do I not strike near the truth?’
‘Near,’ said Galadriel; ‘save that we were not driven forth, but came of ourown will, and against that of the Valar. And through great peril and in despite ofthe Valar for this purpose we came: to take vengeance upon Morgoth, and regainwhat he stole.’
Then Galadriel spoke to Melian of the Silmarils, and of the slaying of KingFinwe at Formenos; but still she said no word of the Oath, nor of the Kinslaying,nor of the burning of the ships at Losgar. But Melian said: ‘Now much you tellme, and yet more I perceive. A darkness you would cast over the long road fromTirion, but I see evil there, which Thingol should learn for his guidance.’
‘Maybe,’ said Galadriel; ‘but not of me.’
And Melian spoke then no more of these matters with Galadriel; but she toldto King Thingol all that she had heard of the Silmarils. ‘This is a great matter,’she said, ‘greater indeed than the Noldor themselves understand; for the Light ofAman and the fate of Arda lie locked now in these things, the work of Feanor,who is gone. They shall not be recovered, I foretell, by any power of the Eldar;and the world shall be broken in battles that are to come, ere they are wrestedfrom Morgoth. See now! Feanor they have slain, and many another, as I guess;but first of all the deaths they have brought and yet shall bring was Finwe yourfriend. Morgoth slew him, ere he fled from Aman.’
Then Thingol was silent, being filled with grief and foreboding; but at lengthhe said: ‘Now at last I understand the coming of the Noldor out of the West, atwhich I wondered much before. Not to our aid did they come (save by chance);for those that remain in Middle-earth the Valar will leave to their own devices,until the uttermost need. For vengeance and redress of their loss the Noldorcame. Yet all the more sure shall they be as allies against Morgoth, with whom itis not now to be thought that they shall ever make treaty.’
But Melian said: ‘Truly for these causes they came; but for others also.Beware of the sons of Feanor! The shadow of the wrath of the Valar lies uponthem; and they have done evil, I perceive, both in Aman and to their own kin. Agrief but lulled to sleep lies between the princes of the Noldor.’
And Thingol answered: ‘What is that to me? Of Feanor I have heard butreport, which makes him great indeed. Of his sons I hear little to my pleasure;yet they are likely to prove the deadliest foes of our foe?
‘Their swords and their counsels shall have two edges/ said Melian; andafterwards they spoke no more of this matter.
It was not long before whispered tales began to pass among the Sindarconcerning the deeds of the Noldor ere they came to Beleriand. Certain it iswhence they came, and the evil truth was enhanced and poisoned by lies; but theSindar were yet unwary and trustful of words, and (as may well be thought)Morgoth chose them for this first assault of his malice, for they knew him not.And Cirdan, hearing these dark tales, was troubled; for he was wise, andperceived swiftly that true or false they were put about at this time throughmalice, though the malice he deemed was that of the princes of the Noldor,because of the jealousy of their houses. Therefore he sent messengers to Thingolto tell all that he had heard.
It chanced that at that time the sons of Finarfin were again the guests ofThingol, for they wished to see their sister Galadriel. Then Thingol, beinggreatly moved, spoke in anger to Finrod, saying: ‘Ill have you done to me,kinsman, to conceal so great matters from me. For now I have learned of all theevil deeds of the Noldor/
But Finrod answered: ‘What ill have I done you, lord? Or what evil deed havethe Noldor done in all your realm to grieve you? Neither against your kingshipnor against any of your people have they thought evil or done evil/
‘I marvel at you, son of Earwen,’ said Thingol, ‘that you would come to theboard of your kinsman thus red-handed from the slaying of your mother’s kin,and yet say naught in defence, nor yet seek any pardon!’
Then Finrod was greatly troubled, but he was silent, for he could not defendhimself, save by bringing charges against the other princes of the Noldor; andthat he was loath to do before Thingol. But in Angrod’s heart the memory of thewords of Caranthir welled up again in bitterness, and he cried: ‘Lord, I know notwhat lies you have heard, nor whence; but we came not red-handed. Guiltless wecame forth, save maybe of folly, to listen to the words of fell Feanor, and becomeas if besotted with wine, and as briefly. No evil did we do on our road, butsuffered ourselves great wrong; and forgave it. For this we are named tale¬bearers to you and treasonable to the Noldor: untruly as you know, for we haveof our loyalty been silent before you, and thus earned your anger. But now thesecharges are no longer to be borne, and the truth you shall know.’
Then Angrod spoke bitterly against the sons of Feanor, telling of the blood atAlqualonde, and the Doom of Mandos, and the burning of the ships at Losgar.And he cried: ‘Where-fore should we that endured the Grinding Ice bear thename of kinslayers and traitors?’
‘Yet the shadow of Mandos lies on you also,’ said Melian. But Thingol was
long silent ere he spoke. ‘Go now!’ he said. ‘For my heart is hot within me. Lateryou may return, if you will; for I will not shut my doors for ever against you, mykindred, that were ensnared in an evil that you did not aid. With Fingolfin andhis people also I will keep friendship, for they have bitterly atoned for such ill asthey did. And in our hatred of the Power that wrought all this woe our griefsshall be lost. But hear my words! Never again in my ears shall be heard thetongue of those who slew my kin in Alqualonde! Nor in all my realm shall it beopenly spoken, while my power endures. All the Sindar shall hear my commandthat they shall neither speak with the tongue of the Noldor nor answer to it. Andall such as use it shall be held slayers of kin and betrayers of kin unrepentant.’
Then the sons of Finarfin departed from Menegroth with heavy hearts,perceiving how the words of Mandos would ever be made true, and that none ofthe Noldor that followed after Feanor could escape from the shadow that layupon his house. And it came to pass even as Thingol had spoken; for the Sindarheard his word, and thereafter throughout Beleriand they refused the tongue ofthe Noldor, and shunned those that spoke it aloud; but the Exiles took theSindarin tongue in all their daily uses, and the High Speech of the West wasspoken only by the lords of the Noldor among themselves. Yet that speech livedever as a language of lore, wherever any of that people dwelt.
It came to pass that Nargothrond was full-wrought (and yet Turgon still dweltin the halls of Vinyamar), and the sons of Finarfin were gathered there to a feast;and Galadriel came from Doriath and dwelt a while in Nargothrond. Now KingFinrod Felagund had no wife, and Galadriel asked him why this should be; butforesight came upon Felagund as she spoke, and he said: ‘An oath I too shallswear, and must be free to fulfil it, and go into darkness. Nor shall anything ofmy realm endure that a son should inherit.’
But it is said that not until that hour had such cold thoughts ruled him; forindeed she whom he had loved was Amarie of the Vanyar, and she went not withhim into exile.
CHAPTER 16
OF MAEGLIN
Aredhel Ar-Feiniel, the White Lady of the Noldor, daughter of Fingolfin, dweltin Nevrast with Turgon her brother, and she went with him to the HiddenKingdom. But she wearied of the guarded city of Gondolin, desiring ever thelonger the more to ride again in the wide lands and to walk in the forests, as hadbeen her wont in Valinor; and when two hundred years had passed sinceGondolin was full-wrought, she spoke to Turgon and asked leave to depart.Turgon was loath to grant this, and long denied her; but at the last he yielded,saying: ‘Go then, if you will, though it is against my wisdom, and I forebode thatill will come of it both to you and to me. But you shall go only to seek Fingon,our brother; and those that I send with you shall return hither to Gondolin asswiftly as they may.’
But Aredhel said: ‘I am your sister and not your servant, and beyond yourbounds I will go as seems good to me. And if you begrudge me an escort, then Iwill go alone.’
Then Turgon answered: ‘I grudge you nothing that I have. Yet I desire thatnone shall dwell beyond my walls who know the way hither; and if I trust you,my sister, others I trust less to keep guard on their tongues.’
And Turgon appointed three lords of his household to ride with Aredhel, andhe bade them lead her to Fingon in Hithlum, if they might prevail upon her. ‘Andbe wary,’ he said; ‘for though Morgoth be yet hemmed in the North there aremany perils in Middle-earth of which the Lady knows nothing.’ Then Aredheldeparted from Gondolin, and Turgon’s heart was heavy at her going.
But when she came to the Ford of Brithiach in the River Sirion she said to hercompanions: ‘Turn now south and not north, for I will not ride to Hithlum; myheart desires rather to find the sons of Feanor, my friends of old.’ And since shecould not be dissuaded they turned south as she commanded, and soughtadmittance into Doriath. But the march-wardens denied them; for Thingol wouldsuffer none of the Noldor to pass the Girdle, save his kinsfolk of the house ofFinarfin, and least of all those that were friends of the sons of Feanor. Thereforethe march-wardens said to Aredhel: ‘To the land of Celegorm for which youseek, Lady, you may by no means pass through the realm of King Thingol; youmust ride beyond the Girdle of Melian, to the south or to the north. The speediestway is by the paths that lead east from the Brithiach through Dimbar and alongthe north-march of this kingdom, until you pass the Bridge of Esgalduin and theFords of Aros, and come to the lands that lie behind the Hill of Himring. Theredwell, as we believe, Celegorm and Curufin, and it may be that you will find
them; but the road is perilous.’
Then Aredhel turned back and sought the dangerous road between the hauntedvalleys of Ered Gorgoroth and the north fences of Doriath; and as they drew nearto the evil region of Nan Dungortheb the riders became enmeshed in shadows,and Aredhel strayed from her companions and was lost. They sought long for herin vain, fearing that she had been ensnared, or had drunk from the poisonedstreams of that land; but the fell creatures of Ungoliant that dwelt in the ravineswere aroused and pursued them, and they hardly escaped with their lives. Whenat last they returned and their tale was told there was great sorrow in Gondolin;and Turgon sat long alone, enduring grief and anger in silence.
But Aredhel, having sought in vain for her companions, rode on, for she wasfearless and hardy of heart, as were all the children of Finwe; and she held onher way, and crossing Esgalduin and Aros came to the land of Himlad betweenAros and Celon where Celegorm and Curufin dwelt in those days, before thebreaking of the Siege of Angband. At that time they were from home, ridingwith Caranthir east in Thargelion; but the people of Celegorm welcomed her andbade her stay among them with honour until their lord’s return. There for a whileshe was content, and had great joy in wandering free in the woodlands; but as theyear lengthened and Celegorm did not return, she became restless again, andtook to riding alone ever further abroad, seeking for new paths and untroddenglades. Thus it chanced in the waning of the year that Aredhel came to the southof Himlad, and passed over Celon; and before she was aware she was enmeshedin Nan Elmoth.
In that wood in ages past Melian walked in the twilight of Middle-earth whenthe trees were young, and enchantment lay upon it still. But now the trees of NanElmoth were the tallest and darkest in all Beleriand, and there the sun nevercame; and there Eol dwelt, who was named the Dark Elf. Of old he was of thekin of Thingol, but he was restless and ill at ease in Doriath, and when the Girdleof Melian was set about the Forest of Region where he dwelt he fled thence toNan Elmoth. There he lived in deep shadow, loving the night and the twilightunder the stars. He shunned the Noldor, holding them to blame for the return ofMorgoth, to trouble the quiet of Beleriand; but for the Dwarves he had moreliking than any other of the Elvenfolk of old. From him the Dwarves learnedmuch of what passed in the lands of the Eldar.
Now the traffic of the Dwarves down from the Blue Mountains followed tworoads across East Beleriand, and the northern way, going towards the Fords ofAros, passed nigh to Nan Elmoth; and there Eol would meet the Naugrim andhold converse with them. And as their friendship grew he would at times go anddwell as guest in the deep mansions of Nogrod or Belegost. There he learned
much of metalwork, and came to great skill therein; and he devised a metal ashard as the steel of the Dwarves, but so malleable that he could make it thin andsupple; and yet it remained resistant to all blades and darts. He named it galvorn,for it was black and shining like jet, and he was clad in it whenever he wentabroad. But Eol, though stooped by his smithwork, was no Dwarf, but a tall Elfof a high kin of the Teleri, noble though grim of face; and his eyes could seedeep into shadows and dark places. And it came to pass that he saw Aredhel Ar-Feiniel as she strayed among the tall trees near the borders of Nan Elmoth, agleam of white in the dim land. Very fair she seemed to him, and he desired her;and he set his enchantments about her so that she could not find the ways out,but drew ever nearer to his dwelling in the depths of the wood. There were hissmithy, and his dim halls, and such servants as he had, silent and secret as theirmaster. And when Aredhel, weary with wandering, came at last to his doors, herevealed himself; and he welcomed her, and led her into his house. And there sheremained; for Eol took her to wife, and it was long ere any of her kin heard ofher again.
It is not said that Aredhel was wholly unwilling, nor that her life in NanElmoth was hateful to her for many years. For though at Eol’s command shemust shun the sunlight, they wandered far together under the stars or by the lightof the sickle moon; or she might fare alone as she would, save that Eol forbadeher to seek the sons of Feanor, or any others of the Noldor. And Aredhel bore toEol a son in the shadows of Nan Elmoth, and in her heart she gave him a namein the forbidden tongue of the Noldor, Lomion, that signifies Child of theTwilight; but his father gave him no name until he was twelve years old. Then hecalled him Maeglin, which is Sharp Glance, for he perceived that the eyes of hisson were more piercing than his own, and his thought could read the secrets ofhearts beyond the mist of words.
As Maeglin grew to full stature he resembled in face and form rather hiskindred of the Noldor, but in mood and mind he was the son of his father. Hiswords were few save in matters that touched him near, and then his voice had apower to move those that heard him and to overthrow those that withstood him.He was tall and black-haired; his eyes were dark, yet bright and keen as the eyesof the Noldor, and his skin was white. Often he went with Eol to the cities of theDwarves in the east of Ered Lindon, and there he learned eagerly what theywould teach, and above all the craft of finding the ores of metals in themountains.
Yet it is said that Maeglin loved his mother better, and if Eol were abroad hewould sit long beside her and listen to all that she could tell him of her kin andtheir deeds in Eldamar, and of the might and valour of the princes of the Houseof Fingolfin. All these things he laid to heart, but most of all that which he heardof Turgon, and that he had no heir; for Elenwe his wife perished in the crossingof the Helcaraxe, and his daughter Idril Celebrindal was his only child.
In the telling of these tales there was awakened in Aredhel a desire to see herown kin again, and she marvelled that she had grown weary of the light ofGondolin, and the fountains in the sun, and the green sward of Tumladen underthe windy skies of spring; moreover she was often alone in the shadows whenboth her son and her husband were away. Of these tales also grew the firstquarrels of Maeglin and Eol. For by no means would his mother reveal toMaeglin where Turgon dwelt, nor by what means one might come thither, and hebided his time, trusting yet to wheedle the secret from her, or perhaps to read herunguarded mind; but ere that could be done he desired to look on the Noldor andspeak with the sons of Feanor, his kin, that dwelt not far away. But when he
declared his purpose to Eol, his father was wrathful. ‘You are of the house ofEol, Maeglin, my son/ he said, ‘and not of the Golodhrim. All this land is theland of the Teleri, and I will not deal nor have my son deal with the slayers ofour kin, the invaders and usurpers of our homes. In this you shall obey me, or Iwill set you in bonds/ And Maeglin did not answer, but was cold and silent, andwent abroad no more with Eol; and Eol mistrusted him.
It came to pass that at the midsummer the Dwarves, as was their custom, badeEol to a feast in Nogrod; and he rode away. Now Maeglin and his mother werefree for a while to go where they wished, and they rode often to the eaves of thewood, seeking the sunlight; and desire grew hot in Maeglin’s heart to leave NanElmoth for ever. Therefore he said to Aredhel: ‘Lady, let us depart while there istime! What hope is there in this wood for you or for me? Here we are held inbondage, and no profit shall I find here; for I have learned all that my father hasto teach, or that the Naugrim will reveal to me. Shall we not seek for Gondolin?You shall be my guide, and I will be your guard!’
Then Aredhel was glad, and looked with pride upon her son; and telling theservants of Eol that they went to seek the sons of Feanor they departed and rodeaway to the north eaves of Nan Elmoth. There they crossed the slender stream ofCelon into the land of Himlad and rode on to the Fords of Aros, and so westwardalong the fences of Doriath.
Now Eol returned out of the east sooner than Maeglin had foreseen, and foundhis wife and his son but two days gone; and so great was his anger that hefollowed after them even by the light of day. As he entered the Himlad hemastered his wrath and went warily, remembering his danger, for Celegorm andCurufin were mighty lords who loved Eol not at all, and Curufin moreover wasof perilous mood; but the scouts of Aglon had marked the riding of Maeglin andAredhel to the Fords of Aros, and Curufin perceiving that strange deeds wereafoot came south from the Pass and encamped near the Fords. And before Eolhad ridden far across the Himlad he was waylaid by the riders of Curufin, andtaken to their lord.
Then Curufin said to Eol: ‘What errand have you, Dark Elf, in my lands? Anurgent matter, perhaps, that keeps one so sun-shy abroad by day.’
And Eol knowing his peril restrained the bitter words that arose in his mind. ‘Ihave learned, Lord Curufin,’ he said, ‘that my son and my wife, the White Ladyof Gondolin, have ridden to visit you while I was from home; and it seemed tome fitting that I should join them on this errand.’
Then Curufin laughed at Eol, and he said: ‘They might have found theirwelcome here less warm than they hoped, had you accompanied them; but it isno matter, for that was not their errand. It is not two days since they passed over
the Arossiach, and thence rode swiftly westward. It seems that you woulddeceive me; unless indeed you yourself have been deceived.’
And Eol answered: Then, lord, perhaps you will give me leave to go, anddiscover the truth of this matter.’
‘You have my leave, but not my love,’ said Curufin. ‘The sooner you departfrom my land the better will it please me.’
Then Eol mounted his horse, saying: ‘It is good, Lord Curufin, to find akinsman thus kindly at need. I will remember it when I return.’ Then Curufinlooked darkly upon Eol. ‘Do not flaunt the title of your wife before me,’ he said.‘For those who steal the daughters of the Noldor and wed them without gift orleave do not gain kinship with their kin. I have given you leave to go. Take it,and be gone. By the laws of the Eldar I may not slay you at this time. And thiscounsel I add: return now to your dwelling in the darkness of Nan Elmoth; formy heart warns me that if you now pursue those who love you no more, neverwill you return thither.’
Then Eol rode off in haste, and he was filled with hatred of all the Noldor; forhe perceived now that Maeglin and Aredhel were fleeing to Gondolin. Anddriven by anger and the shame of his humiliation he crossed the Fords of Arosand rode hard upon the way that they had gone before; but though they knew notthat he followed them, and he had the swiftest steed, he came never in sight ofthem until they reached the Brithiach, and abandoned their horses. Then by illfate they were betrayed; for the horses neighed loudly, and Eol’s steed heardthem, and sped towards them; and Eol saw from afar the white raiment ofAredhel, and marked which way she went, seeking the secret path into themountains.
Now Aredhel and Maeglin came to the Outer Gate of Gondolin and the DarkGuard under the mountains; and there she was received with joy, and passingthrough the Seven Gates she came with Maeglin to Turgon upon Amon Gwareth.Then the King listened with wonder to all that Aredhel had to tell; and he lookedwith liking upon Maeglin his sister-son, seeing in him one worthy to beaccounted among the princes of the Noldor.
‘I rejoice indeed that Ar-Feiniel has returned to Gondolin,’ he said, ‘and nowmore fair again shall my city seem than in the days when I deemed her lost. AndMaeglin shall have the highest honour in my realm.’
Then Maeglin bowed low and took Turgon for lord and king, to do all his will;but thereafter he stood silent and watchful, for the bliss and splendour ofGondolin surpassed all that he had imagined from the tales of his mother, and hewas amazed by the strength of the city and the hosts of its people, and the manythings strange and beautiful that he beheld. Yet to none were his eyes more often
drawn than to Idril the King’s daughter, who sat beside him; for she was goldenas the Vanyar, her mother’s kindred, and she seemed to him as the sun fromwhich all the King’s hall drew its light.
But Eol, following after Aredhel, found the Dry River and the secret path, andso creeping in by stealth he came to the Guard, and was taken and questioned.And when the Guard heard that he claimed Aredhel as wife they were amazed,and sent a swift messenger to the City; and he came to the King’s hall.
'Lord,’ he cried, ‘the Guard have taken captive one that came by stealth to theDark Gate. Eol he names himself, and he is a tall Elf, dark and grim, of thekindred of the Sindar; yet he claims the Lady Aredhel as his wife, and demandsto be brought before you. His wrath is great and he is hard to restrain; but wehave not slain him as your law commands.’
Then Aredhel said: ‘Alas! Eol has followed us, even as I feared. But withgreat stealth was it done; for we saw and heard no pursuit as we entered upon theHidden Way.’ Then she said to the messenger: ‘He speaks but the truth. He isEol, and I am his wife, and he is the father of my son. Slay him not, but lead himhither to the King’s judgement, if the King so wills.’
And so it was done; and Eol was brought to Turgon’s hall and stood before hishigh seat, proud and sullen. Though he was amazed no less than his son at allthat he saw, his heart was filled the more with anger and with hate of the Noldor.But Turgon treated him with honour, and rose up and would take his hand; andhe said: ‘Welcome, kinsman, for so I hold you. Here you shall dwell at yourpleasure, save only that you must here abide and depart not from my kingdom;for it is my law that none who finds the way hither shall depart.’
But Eol withdrew his hand. ‘I acknowledge not your law,’ he said. ‘No righthave you or any of your kin in this land to seize realms or to set bounds, eitherhere or there. This is the land of the Teleri, to which you bring war and allunquiet, dealing ever proudly and unjustly. I care nothing for your secrets and Icame not to spy upon you, but to claim my own: my wife and my son. Yet if inAredhel your sister you have some claim, then let her remain; let the bird goback to the cage, where soon she will sicken again, as she sickened before. Butnot so Maeglin. My son you shall not withhold from me. Come, Maeglin son ofEol! Your father commands you. Leave the house of his enemies and the slayersof his kin, or be accursed!’ But Maeglin answered nothing.
Then Turgon sat in his high seat holding his staff of doom, and in a stern voicespoke: ‘I will not debate with you, Dark Elf. By the swords of the Noldor aloneare your sunless woods defended. Your freedom to wander there wild you owe tomy kin; and but for them long since you would have laboured in thraldom in thepits of Angband. And here I am King; and whether you will it or will it not, my
doom is law. This choice only is given to you: to abide here, or to die here; andso also for your son.’
Then Eol looked into the eyes of King Turgon, and he was not daunted, butstood long without word or movement while a still silence fell upon the hall; andAredhel was afraid, knowing that he was perilous. Suddenly, swift as serpent, heseized a javelin that he held hid beneath his cloak and cast it at Maeglin, crying:The second choice I take and for my son also! You shall not hold what is mine!’
But Aredhel sprang before the dart, and it smote her in the shoulder; and Eolwas overborne by many and set in bonds, and led away, while others tendedAredhel. But Maeglin looking upon his father was silent.
It was appointed that Eol should be brought on the next day to the King’sjudgement; and Aredhel and Idril moved Turgon to mercy. But in the eveningAredhel sickened, though the wound had seemed little, and she fell into thedarkness, and in the night she died; for the point of the javelin was poisoned,though none knew it until too late.
Therefore when Eol was brought before Turgon he found no mercy; and theyled him forth to the Caragdur, a precipice of black rock upon the north side ofthe hill of Gondolin, there to cast him down from the sheer walls of the city. AndMaeglin stood by and said nothing; but at the last Eol cried out: ‘So you forsakeyour father and his kin, ill-gotten son! Here shall you fail of all your hopes, andhere may you yet die the same death as I.’
Then they cast Eol over the Caragdur, and so he ended, and to all in Gondolinit seemed just; but Idril was troubled, and from that day she mistrusted herkinsman. But Maeglin prospered and grew great among the Gondolindrim,praised by all, and high in the favour of Turgon; for if he would learn eagerlyand swiftly all that he might, he had much also to teach. And he gathered abouthim all such as had the most bent to smithcraft and mining; and he sought in theEchoriath (which are the Encircling Mountains), and found rich lodes of ore ofdivers metals. Most he prized the hard iron of the mine of Anghabar in the northof the Echoriath, and thence he got a wealth of forged metal and of steel, so thatthe arms of the Gondolindrim were made ever stronger and more keen; and thatstood them in good stead in the days to come. Wise in counsel was Maeglin andwary, and yet hardy and valiant at need. And that was seen in after days: forwhen in the dread year of the Nirnaeth Arnoediad Turgon opened his leaguer andmarched forth to the help of Fingon in the north, Maeglin would not remain inGondolin as regent of the King, but went to the war and fought beside Turgon,and proved fell and fearless in battle.
Thus all seemed well with the fortunes of Maeglin, who had risen to bemighty among the princes of the Noldor, and greatest save one in the most
renowned of their realms. Yet he did not reveal his heart; and though not allthings went as he would he endured it in silence, hiding his mind so that fewcould read it, unless it were Idril Celebrindal. For from his first days in Gondolinhe had borne a grief, ever worsening, that robbed him of all joy: he loved thebeauty of Idril and desired her, without hope. The Eldar wedded not with kin sonear, nor ever before had any desired to do so. And however that might be, Idrilloved Maeglin not at all; and knowing his thought of her she loved him the less.For it seemed to her a thing strange and crooked in him, as indeed the Eldar eversince have deemed it: an evil fruit of the Kinslaying, whereby the shadow of thecurse of Mandos fell upon the last hope of the Noldor. But as the years passedstill Maeglin watched Idril, and waited, and his love turned to darkness in hisheart. And he sought the more to have his will in other matters, shirking no toilor burden, if he might thereby have power.
Thus it was in Gondolin; and amid all the bliss of that realm, while its glorylasted, a dark seed of evil was sown.
mn
CHAPTER 17
OF THE COMING OF MEN INTO THE WEST
When three hundred years and more were gone since the Noldor came toBeleriand, in the days of the Long Peace, Finrod Felagund lord of Nargothrondjourneyed east of Sirion and went hunting with Maglor and Maedhros, sons ofFeanor. But he wearied of the chase and passed on alone towards the mountainsof Ered Lindon that he saw shining afar; and taking the Dwarf-road he crossedGelion at the ford of Sarn Athrad, and turning south over the upper streams ofAscar, he came into the north of Ossiriand.
In a valley among the foothills of the mountains, below the springs of Thalos,he saw lights in the evening, and far off he heard the sound of song. At this hewondered much, for the Green-elves of that land lit no fires, nor did they sing bynight. At first he feared that a raid of Ores had passed the leaguer of the North,but as he drew near he perceived that it was not so; for the singers used a tonguethat he had not heard before, neither that of Dwarves nor of Ores. ThenFelagund, standing silent in the night-shadow of the trees, looked down into thecamp, and there he beheld a strange people.
Now these were a part of the kindred and following of Beor the Old, as he wasafterwards called, a chieftain among Men. After many lives of wandering out ofthe East he had led them at last over the Blue Mountains, the first of the race ofMen to enter Beleriand; and they sang because they were glad, and believed thatthey had escaped from all perils and had come at last to a land without fear.
Long Felagund watched them, and love for them stirred in his heart; but heremained hidden in the trees until they had all fallen asleep. Then he wentamong the sleeping people, and sat beside their dying fire where none keptwatch; and he took up a rude harp which Beor had laid aside, and he playedmusic upon it such as the ears of Men had not heard; for they had as yet noteachers in the art, save only the Dark Elves in the wild lands.
Now men awoke and listened to Felagund as he harped and sang, and eachthought that he was in some fair dream, until he saw that his fellows were awakealso beside him; but they did not speak or stir while Felagund still played,because of the beauty of the music and the wonder of the song. Wisdom was inthe words of the Elven-king, and the hearts grew wiser that hearkened to him;for the things of which he sang, of the making of Arda, and the bliss of Amanbeyond the shadows of the Sea, came as clear visions before their eyes, and hisElvish speech was interpreted in each mind according to its measure.
Thus it was that Men called King Felagund, whom they first met of all theEldar, Nona, that is Wisdom, in the language of that people, and after him they
named his folk Nomin, the Wise. Indeed they believed at first that Felagund wasone of the Valar, of whom they had heard rumour that they dwelt far in the West;and this was (some say) the cause of their journeying. But Felagund dweltamong them and taught them true knowledge, and they loved him, and took himfor their lord, and were ever after loyal to the house of Finarfin.
Now the Eldar were beyond all other peoples skilled in tongues; and Felagunddiscovered also that he could read in the minds of Men such thoughts as theywished to reveal in speech, so that their words were easily interpreted. It is saidalso that these Men had long had dealings with the Dark Elves east of themountains, and from them had learned much of their speech; and since all thelanguages of the Quendi were of one origin, the language of Beor and his folkresembled the Elven-tongue in many words and devices. It was not longtherefore before Felagund could hold converse with Beor; and while he dweltwith him they spoke much together. But when he questioned him concerning thearising of Men and their journeys, Beor would say little; and indeed he knewlittle, for the fathers of his people had told few tales of their past and a silencehad fallen upon their memory. ‘A darkness lies behind us,’ Beor said; ‘and wehave turned our backs upon it, and we do not desire to return thither even inthought. Westwards our hearts have been turned, and we believe that there weshall find Light.’
But it was said afterwards among the Eldar that when Men awoke in Hildorienat the rising of the Sun the spies of Morgoth were watchful, and tidings weresoon brought to him; and this seemed to him so great a matter that secretly undershadow he himself departed from Angband, and went forth into Middle-earth,leaving to Sauron the command of the War. Of his dealings with Men the Eldarindeed knew nothing, at that time, and learnt but little afterwards; but that adarkness lay upon the hearts of Men (as the shadow of the Kinslaying and theDoom of Mandos lay upon the Noldor) they perceived clearly even in the peopleof the Elf-friends whom they first knew. To corrupt or destroy whatsoever arosenew and fair was ever the chief desire of Morgoth; and doubtless he had thispurpose also in his errand: by fear and lies to make Men the foes of the Eldar,and bring them up out of the east against Beleriand. But this design was slow toripen, and was never wholly achieved; for Men (it is said) were at first very fewin number, whereas Morgoth grew afraid of the growing power and union of theEldar and came back to Angband, leaving behind at that time but few servants,and those of less might and cunning.
Now Felagund learned from Beor that there were many other Men of like
mind who were also journeying westward. ‘Others of my own kin have crossedthe Mountains/ he said, ‘and they are wandering not far away; and the Haladin,a people from whom we are sundered in speech, are still in the valleys on theeastern slopes, awaiting tidings before they venture further. There are yet otherMen, whose tongue is more like to ours, with whom we have had dealings attimes. They were before us on the westward march, but we passed them; for theyare a numerous people, and yet keep together and move slowly, being all ruledby one chieftain whom they call Marach/
Now the Green-elves of Ossiriand were troubled by the coming of Men, andwhen they heard that a lord of the Eldar from over the Sea was among them theysent messengers to Felagund. ‘Lord/ they said, ‘if you have power over thesenewcomers, bid them return by the ways that they came, or else to go forward.For we desire no strangers in this land to break the peace in which we live. Andthese folk are hewers of trees and hunters of beasts; therefore we are theirunfriends, and if they will not depart we shall afflict them in all ways that wecan/
Then by the advice of Felagund Beor gathered all the wandering families andkindreds of his people, and they removed over Gelion, and took up their abode inthe lands of Amrod and Amras, upon the east banks of the Celon south of NanElmoth, near to the borders of Doriath; and the name of that land thereafter wasEstolad, the Encampment. But when after a year had passed Felagund wished toreturn to his own country, Beor begged leave to come with him; and he remainedin the service of the King of Nargothrond while his life lasted. In this way he gothis name, Beor, whereas his name before had been Balan; for Beor signified‘Vassal’ in the tongue of his people. The rule of his folk he committed to Baranhis elder son; and he did not return again to Estolad.
Soon after the departure of Felagund the other Men of whom Beor had spokencame also into Beleriand. First came the Haladin; but meeting the unfriendshipof the Green-elves they turned north and dwelt in Thargelion, in the country ofCaranthir son of Feanor: there for a time they had peace, and the people ofCaranthir paid little heed to them. In the next year Marach led his people overthe mountains; they were a tall and warlike folk, marching in ordered companies,and the Elves of Ossiriand hid themselves and did not waylay them. But Marach,hearing that the people of Beor were dwelling in a green and fertile land, camedown the Dwarf-road, and settled in the country south and east of the dwellingsof Baran son of Beor; and there was great friendship between those peoples.
Felagund himself often returned to visit Men; and many other Elves out of the
west-lands, both Noldor and Sindar, journeyed to Estolad, being eager to see theEdain, whose coming had long been foretold. Now Atani, the Second People,was the name given to Men in Valinor in the lore that told of their coming; but inthe speech of Beleriand that name became Edain, and it was there used only ofthe three kindreds of the Elf-friends.
Fingolfin, as King of all the Noldor, sent messengers of welcome to them; andthen many young and eager men of the Edain went away and took service withthe kings and lords of the Eldar. Among them was Malach son of Marach, and hedwelt in Hithlum for fourteen years; and he learned the Elven-tongue and wasgiven the name of Aradan.
The Edain did not long dwell content in Estolad, for many still desired to gowestward; but they did not know the way. Before them lay the fences of Doriath,and southward lay Sirion and its impassable fens. Therefore the kings of thethree houses of the Noldor, seeing hope of strength in the sons of Men, sent wordthat any of the Edain that wished might remove and come to dwell among theirpeople. In this way the migration of the Edain began: at first little by little, butlater in families and kindreds, they arose and left Estolad, until after some fiftyyears many thousands had entered the lands of the Kings. Most of these took thelong road northwards, until the ways became well known to them. The people ofBeor came to Dorthonion and dwelt in lands ruled by the house of Finarfin. Thepeople of Aradan (for Marach his father remained in Estolad until his death) forthe most part went on westward; and some came to Hithlum, but Magor son ofAradan and many of the people passed down Sirion into Beleriand and dwelt awhile in the vales of the southern slopes of Ered Wethrin.
It is said that in all these matters none save Finrod Felagund took counsel withKing Thingol, and he was ill pleased, both for that reason, and because he wastroubled by dreams concerning the coming of Men, ere ever the first tidings ofthem were heard. Therefore he commanded that Men should take no lands todwell in save in the north, and that the princes whom they served should beanswerable for all that they did; and he said: Tnto Doriath shall no Man comewhile my realm lasts, not even those of the house of Beor who serve Finrod thebeloved.’ Melian said nothing to him at that time, but afterwards she said toGaladriel: 'Now the world runs on swiftly to great tidings. And one of Men,even of Beor’s house, shall indeed come, and the Girdle of Melian shall notrestrain him, for doom greater than my power shall send him; and the songs thatshall spring from that coming shall endure when all Middle-earth is changed.’
But many Men remained in Estolad, and there was still a mingled people
living there long years after, until in the min of Beleriand they wereoverwhelmed or fled back into the East. For beside the old who deemed thattheir wandering days were over there were not a few who desired to go their ownways, and they feared the Eldar and the light of their eyes; and then dissensionsawoke among the Edain, in which the shadow of Morgoth may be discerned, forcertain it is that he knew of the coming of Men into Beleriand and of theirgrowing friendship with the Elves.
The leaders of discontent were Bereg of the house of Beor, and Amlach, oneof the grandsons of Marach; and they said openly: ‘We took long roads, desiringto escape the perils of Middle-earth and the dark things that dwell there; for weheard that there was Light in the West. But now we learn that the Light is beyondthe Sea. Thither we cannot come where the Gods dwell in bliss. Save one; forthe Lord of the Dark is here before us, and the Eldar, wise but fell, who makeendless war upon him. In the North he dwells, they say; and there is the pain anddeath from which we fled. We will not go that way.’
Then a council and assembly of Men was called, and great numbers cametogether. And the Elf-friends answered Bereg, saying: ‘Truly from the Dark Kingcome all the evils from which we fled; but he seeks dominion over all Middle-earth, and whither now shall we turn and he will not pursue us? Unless he bevanquished here, or at least held in leaguer. Only by the valour of the Eldar is herestrained, and maybe it was for this purpose, to aid them at need, that we werebrought into this land.’
To this Bereg answered: ‘Let the Eldar look to it! Our lives are short enough.’But there arose one who seemed to all to be Amlach son of Imlach, speaking fellwords that shook the hearts of all who heard him: ‘All this is but Elvish lore,tales to beguile newcomers that are unwary. The Sea has no shore. There is noLight in the West. You have followed a fool-fire of the Elves to the end of theworld! Which of you has seen the least of the Gods? Who has beheld the DarkKing in the North? Those who seek the dominion of Middle-earth are the Eldar.Greedy for wealth they have delved in the earth for its secrets and have stirred towrath the things that dwell beneath it, as they have ever done and ever shall. Letthe Ores have the realm that is theirs, and we will have ours. There is room inthe world, if the Eldar will let us be! ’
Then those that listened sat for a while astounded, and a shadow of fear fell ontheir hearts; and they resolved to depart far from the lands of the Eldar. Butafterwards Amlach returned among them, and denied that he had been present attheir debate or had spoken such words as they reported; and there was doubt andbewilderment among Men. Then the Elf-friends said: ‘You will now believe thisat least: there is indeed a Dark Lord, and his spies and emissaries are among us;
for he fears us, and the strength that we may give to his foes.’
But some still answered: ‘He hates us, rather, and ever the more the longer wedwell here, meddling in his quarrel with the Kings of the Eldar, to no gain ofours.’ Many therefore of those that yet remained in Estolad made ready todepart; and Bereg led a thousand of the people of Beor away southwards, andthey passed out of the songs of those days. But Amlach repented, saying: ‘I havenow a quarrel of my own with this Master of Lies, which will last to my life’send’; and he went away north and entered the service of Maedhros. But those ofhis people who were of like mind with Bereg chose a new leader, and they wentback over the mountains into Eriador, and are forgotten.
During this time the Haladin remained in Thargelion and were content. ButMorgoth, seeing that by lies and deceits he could not yet wholly estrange Elvesand Men, was filled with wrath, and endeavoured to do Men what hurt he could.Therefore he sent out an Ore-raid, and passing east it escaped the leaguer, andcame in stealth back over Ered Lindon by the passes of the Dwarf-road, and fellupon the Haladin in the southern woods of the land of Caranthir.
Now the Haladin did not live under the rule of lords or many together, buteach homestead was set apart and governed its own affairs, and they were slowto unite. But there was among them a man named Haldad, who was masterfuland fearless; and he gathered all the brave men that he could find, and retreatedto the angle of land between Ascar and Gelion, and in the utmost corner he builta stockade across from water to water; and behind it they led all the women andchildren that they could save. There they were besieged, until their food wasgone.
Haldad had twin children: Haleth his daughter, and Haidar his son; and bothwere valiant in the defence, for Haleth was a woman of great heart and strength.But at last Haldad was slain in a sortie against the Ores; and Haidar, who rushedout to save his father’s body from their butchery, was hewn down beside him.Then Haleth held the people together, though they were without hope; and somecast themselves in the rivers and were drowned. But seven days later, as the Oresmade their last assault and had already broken through the stockade, there camesuddenly a music of trumpets, and Caranthir with his host came down from thenorth and drove the Ores into the rivers.
Then Caranthir looked kindly upon Men and did Haleth great honour; and heoffered her recompense for her father and brother. And seeing, over late, whatvalour there was in the Edain, he said to her: ‘If you will remove and dwellfurther north, there you shall have the friendship and protection of the Eldar, and
free lands of your own.’
But Haleth was proud, and unwilling to be guided or ruled, and most of theHaladin were of like mood. Therefore she thanked Caranthir, but answered: ‘Mymind is now set, lord, to leave the shadow of the mountains, and go west,whither others of our kin have gone.’ When therefore the Haladin had gatheredall whom they could find alive of their folk who had fled wild into the woodsbefore the Ores, and had gleaned what remained of their goods in their burnedhomesteads, they took Haleth for their chief; and she led them at last to Estolad,and there dwelt for a time.
But they remained a people apart, and were ever after known to Elves andMen as the People of Haleth. Haleth remained their chief while her days lasted,but she did not wed, and the headship afterwards passed to Haldan son of Haidarher brother. Soon however Haleth desired to move westward again; and thoughmost of her people were against this counsel, she led them forth once more; andthey went without help or guidance of the Eldar, and passing over Celon andAros they journeyed in the perilous land between the Mountains of Terror andthe Girdle of Melian. That land was even then not yet so evil as it after became,but it was no road for mortal Men to take without aid, and Haleth only broughther people through it with hardship and loss, constraining them to go forward bythe strength of her will. At last they crossed over the Brithiach, and many bitterlyrepented of their journey; but there was now no returning. Therefore in newlands they went back to their old life as best they could; and they dwelt in freehomesteads in the woods of Talath Dirnen beyond Teiglin, and some wanderedfar into the realm of Nargothrond. But there were many who loved the LadyHaleth and wished to go whither she would, and dwell under her rule; and theseshe led into the Forest of Brethil, between Teiglin and Sirion. Thither in the evildays that followed many of her scattered folk returned.
Now Brethil was claimed as part of his realm by King Thingol, though it wasnot within the Girdle of Melian, and he would have denied it to Haleth; butFelagund, who had the friendship of Thingol, hearing of all that had befallen thePeople of Haleth, obtained this grace for her: that she should dwell free inBrethil, upon the condition only that her people should guard the Crossings ofTeiglin against all enemies of the Eldar, and allow no Ores to enter their woods.To this Haleth answered: ‘Where are Haldad my father, and Haidar my brother?If the King of Doriath fears a friendship between Haleth and those who havedevoured her kin, then the thoughts of the Eldar are strange to Men? And Halethdwelt in Brethil until she died; and her people raised a green mound over her inthe heights of the forest, Tur Haretha, the Lady-barrow, Haudh-en-Arwen in theSindarin tongue.
In this way it came to pass that the Edain dwelt in the lands of the Eldar, somehere, some there, some wandering, some settled in kindreds or small peoples;and the most part of them soon learned the Grey-elven tongue, both as acommon speech among themselves and because many were eager to learn thelore of the Elves. But after a time the Elf-kings, seeing that it was not good forElves and Men to dwell mingled together without order, and that Men neededlords of their own kind, set regions apart where Men could live their own lives,and appointed chieftains to hold these lands freely. They were the allies of theEldar in war, but marched under their own leaders. Yet many of the Edain haddelight in the friendship of the Elves, and dwelt among them for so long as theyhad leave; and the young men often took service for a time in the hosts of thekings.
Now Hador Lorindol, son of Hathol, son of Magor, son of Malach Aradan,entered the household of Fingolfin in his youth, and was loved by the King.Fingolfin therefore gave to him the lordship of Dor-lomin, and into that land hegathered most of the people of his kin, and became the mightiest of thechieftains of the Edain. In his house only the Elven-tongue was spoken; but theirown speech was not forgotten, and from it came the common tongue ofNumenor. But in Dorthonion the lordship of the people of Beor and the countryof Ladros was given to Boromir, son of Boron, who was the grandson of Beorthe Old.
The sons of Hador were Galdor and Gundor; and the sons of Galdor wereHurin and Huor; and the son of Hurin was Turin the Bane of Glaurung; and theson of Huor was Tuor, father of Earendil the Blessed. The son of Boromir wasBregor, whose sons were Bregolas and Barahir; and the sons of Bregolas wereBaragund and Belegund. The daughter of Baragund was Morwen, the mother ofTurin, and the daughter of Belegund was Rian, the mother of Tuor. But the sonof Barahir was Beren One-hand, who won the love of Luthien Thingol’sdaughter, and returned from the Dead; from them came Elwing the wife ofEarendil, and all the Kings of Numenor after.
All these were caught in the net of the Doom of the Noldor; and they did greatdeeds which the Eldar remember still among the histories of the Kings of old.And in those days the strength of Men was added to the power of the Noldor,and their hope was high; and Morgoth was straitly enclosed, for the people ofHador, being hardy to endure cold and long wandering, feared not at times to gofar into the north and there keep watch upon the movements of the Enemy. TheMen of the Three Houses throve and multiplied, but greatest among them wasthe house of Hador Goldenhead, peer of Elven-lords. His people were of greatstrength and stature, ready in mind, bold and steadfast, quick to anger and to
laughter, mighty among the Children of Ilhvatar in the youth of Mankind.Yellow-haired they were for the most part, and blue-eyed; but not so was Turin,whose mother was Morwen of the house of Beor. The Men of that house weredark or brown of hair, with grey eyes; and of all Men they were most like to theNoldor and most loved by them; for they were eager of mind, cunning-handed,swift in understanding, long in memory, and they were moved sooner to pitythan to laughter. Like to them were the woodland folk of Haleth, but they wereof lesser stature, and less eager for lore. They used few words, and did not lovegreat concourse of men; and many among them delighted in solitude, wanderingfree in the greenwoods while the wonder of the lands of the Eldar was new uponthem. But in the realms of the West their time was brief and their days unhappy.
The years of the Edain were lengthened, according to the reckoning of Men,after their coming to Beleriand; but at last Beor the Old died when he had livedthree and ninety years, for four and forty of which he had served King Felagund.And when he lay dead, of no wound or grief, but stricken by age, the Eldar sawfor the first time the swift waning of the life of Men, and the death of wearinesswhich they knew not in themselves; and they grieved greatly for the loss of theirfriends. But Beor at the last had relinquished his life willingly and passed inpeace; and the Eldar wondered much at the strange fate of Men, for in all theirlore there was no account of it, and its end was hidden from them.
Nonetheless the Edain of old learned swiftly of the Eldar all such art andknowledge as they could receive, and their sons increased in wisdom and skill,until they far surpassed all others of Mankind, who dwelt still east of themountains and had not seen the Eldar, nor looked upon the faces that had beheldthe Light of Valinor.
CHAPTER 18
OF THE RUIN OF BELERIAND AND THE FALL OF
FINGOLFIN
Now Fingolfin, King of the North, and High King of the Noldor, seeing that hispeople were become numerous and strong, and that the Men allied to them weremany and valiant, pondered once more an assault upon Angband; for he knewthat they lived in danger while the circle of the siege was incomplete, andMorgoth was free to labour in his deep mines, devising what evils none couldforetell ere he should reveal them. This counsel was wise according to themeasure of his knowledge; for the Noldor did not yet comprehend the fullness ofthe power of Morgoth, nor understand that their unaided war upon him waswithout final hope, whether they hasted or delayed. But because the land wasfair and their kingdoms wide, most of the Noldor were content with things asthey were, trusting them to last, and slow to begin an assault in which manymust surely perish were it in victory or in defeat. Therefore they were littledisposed to hearken to Fingolfin, and the sons of Feanor at that time least of all.Among the chieftains of the Noldor Angrod and Aegnor alone were of like mindwith the King; for they dwelt in regions whence Thangorodrim could bedescried, and the threat of Morgoth was present to their thought. Thus thedesigns of Fingolfin came to naught, and the land had peace yet for a while.
But when the sixth generation of Men after Beor and Marach were not yetcome to full manhood, it being then four hundred years and five and fifty sincethe coming of Fingolfin, the evil befell that he had long dreaded, and yet moredire and sudden than his darkest fear. For Morgoth had long prepared his force insecret, while ever the malice of his heart grew greater, and his hatred of theNoldor more bitter; and he desired not only to end his foes but to destroy alsoand defile the lands that they had taken and made fair. And it is said that his hateovercame his counsel, so that if he had but endured to wait longer, until hisdesigns were full, then the Noldor would have perished utterly. But on his parthe esteemed too lightly the valour of the Elves, and of Men he took yet noaccount.
There came a time of winter, when night was dark and without moon; and thewide plain of Ard-galen stretched dim beneath the cold stars, from the hill-fortsof the Noldor to the feet of Thangorodrim. The watchfires burned low, and theguards were few; on the plain few were waking in the camps of the horsemen ofHithlum. Then suddenly Morgoth sent forth great rivers of flame that ran down
swifter than Balrogs from Thangorodrim, and poured over all the plain; and theMountains of Iron belched forth fires of many poisonous hues, and the fume ofthem stank upon the air, and was deadly. Thus Ard-galen perished, and firedevoured its grasses; and it became a burned and desolate waste, full of achoking dust, barren and lifeless. Thereafter its name was changed, and it wascalled Anfauglith, the Gasping Dust. Many charred bones had there theirroofless grave; for many of the Noldor perished in that burning, who werecaught by the running flame and could not fly to the hills. The heights ofDorthonion and Ered Wethrin held back the fiery torrents, but their woods uponthe slopes that looked towards Angband were all kindled, and the smokewrought confusion among the defenders. Thus began the fourth of the greatbattles, Dagor Bragollach, the Battle of Sudden Flame.
In the front of that fire came Glaurung the golden, father of dragons, in his fullmight; and in his train were Balrogs, and behind them came the black armies ofthe Ores in multitudes such as the Noldor had never before seen or imagined.And they assaulted the fortresses of the Noldor, and broke the leaguer aboutAngband, and slew wherever they found them the Noldor and their allies, Grey-elves and Men. Many of the stoutest of the foes of Morgoth were destroyed inthe first days of that war, bewildered and dispersed and unable to muster theirstrength. War ceased not wholly ever again in Beleriand; but the Battle ofSudden Flame is held to have ended with the coming of spring, when theonslaught of Morgoth grew less.
Thus ended the Siege of Angband; and the foes of Morgoth were scattered andsundered one from another. The most part of the Grey-elves fled south andforsook the northern war; many were received into Doriath, and the kingdomand strength of Thingol grew greater in that time, for the power of Melian thequeen was woven about his borders and evil could not yet enter that hiddenrealm. Others took refuge in the fortresses by the sea, and in Nargothrond; andsome fled the land and hid themselves in Ossiriand, or passing the mountainswandered homeless in the wild. And rumour of the war and the breaking of thesiege reached the ears of Men in the east of Middle-earth.
The sons of Finarfin bore most heavily the brunt of the assault, and Angrodand Aegnor were slain; beside them fell Bregolas lord of the house of Beor, anda great part of the warriors of that people. But Barahir the brother of Bregolaswas in the fighting further westward, near to the Pass of Sirion. There KingFinrod Felagund, hastening from the south, was cut off from his people andsurrounded with small company in the Fen of Serech; and he would have beenslain or taken, but Barahir came up with the bravest of his men and rescued him,and made a wall of spears about him; and they cut their way out of the battle
with great loss. Thus Felagund escaped, and returned to his deep fortress ofNargothrond; but he swore an oath of abiding friendship and aid in every need toBarahir and all his kin, and in token of his vow he gave to Barahir his ring.Barahir was now by right lord of the house of Beor, and he returned toDorthonion; but most of his people fled from their homes and took refuge in thefastness of Hithlum.
So great was the onslaught of Morgoth that Fingolfin and Fingon could notcome to the aid of the sons of Finarfin; and the hosts of Hithlum were drivenback with great loss to the fortresses of Ered Wethrin, and these they hardlydefended against the Ores. Before the walls of Eithel Sirion fell Hador theGolden-haired, defending the rearguard of his lord Fingolfin, being then sixtyand six years of age, and with him fell Gundor his younger son, pierced withmany arrows; and they were mourned by the Elves. Then Galdor the Tall tookthe lordship of his father. And because of the strength and height of the ShadowyMountains, which withstood the torrent of fire, and by the valour of the Elvesand the Men of the North, which neither Ore nor Balrog could yet overcome,Hithlum remained unconquered, a threat upon the flank of Morgoth’s attack; butFingolfin was sundered from his kinsmen by a sea of foes.
For the war had gone ill with the sons of Feanor, and well nigh all the eastmarches were taken by assault. The Pass of Aglon was forced, though with greatcost to the hosts of Morgoth; and Celegorm and Curufin being defeated fledsouth and west by the marches of Doriath, and coming at last to Nargothrondsought harbour with Finrod Felagund. Thus it came to pass that their peopleswelled the strength of Nargothrond; but it would have been better, as was afterseen, if they had remained in the east among their own kin. Maedhros did deedsof surpassing valour, and the Ores fled before his face; for since his tormentupon Thangorodrim his spirit burned like a white fire within, and he was as onethat returns from the dead. Thus the great fortress upon the Hill of Himringcould not be taken, and many of the most valiant that remained, both of thepeople of Dorthonion and of the east marches, rallied there to Maedhros; and fora while he closed once more the Pass of Aglon, so that the Ores could not enterBeleriand by that road. But they overwhelmed the riders of the people of Feanorupon Lothlann, for Glaurung came thither, and passed through Maglor’s Gap,and destroyed all the land between the arms of Gelion. And the Ores took thefortress upon the west slopes of Mount Rerir, and ravaged all Thargelion, theland of Caranthir; and they defiled Lake Helevorn. Thence they passed overGelion with fire and terror and came far into East Beleriand. Maglor joinedMaedhros upon Himring; but Caranthir fled and joined the remnant of his peopleto the scattered folk of the hunters, Amrod and Amras, and they retreated and
passed Ramdal in the south. Upon Amon Ereb they maintained a watch andsome strength of war, and they had aid of the Green-elves; and the Ores camenot into Ossiriand, nor to Taur-im-Duinath and the wilds of the south.
Now news came to Hithlum that Dorthonion was lost and the sons of Finarfinoverthrown, and that the sons of Feanor were driven from their lands. ThenFingolfin beheld (as it seemed to him) the utter ruin of the Noldor, and the defeatbeyond redress of all their houses; and filled with wrath and despair he mountedupon Rochallor his great horse and rode forth alone, and none might restrainhim. He passed over Dor-nu-Fauglith like a wind amid the dust, and all thatbeheld his onset fled in amaze, thinking that Orome himself was come: for agreat madness of rage was upon him, so that his eyes shone like the eyes of theValar. Thus he came alone to Angband’s gates, and he sounded his horn, andsmote once more upon the brazen doors, and challenged Morgoth to come forthto single combat. And Morgoth came.
That was the last time in those wars that he passed the doors of his stronghold,and it is said that he took not the challenge willingly; for though his might wasgreatest of all things in this world, alone of the Valar he knew fear. But he couldnot now deny the challenge before the face of his captains; for the rocks rangwith the shrill music of Fingolfin’s horn, and his voice came keen and cleardown into the depths of Angband; and Fingolfin named Morgoth craven, andlord of slaves. Therefore Morgoth came, climbing slowly from his subterraneanthrone, and the rumour of his feet was like thunder underground. And he issuedforth clad in black armour; and he stood before the King like a tower, iron-crowned, and his vast shield, sable unblazoned, cast a shadow over him like astormcloud. But Fingolfin gleamed beneath it as a star; for his mail was overlaidwith silver, and his blue shield was set with crystals; and he drew his swordRingil, that glittered like ice.
Then Morgoth hurled aloft Grond, the Hammer of the Underworld, and swungit down like a bolt of thunder. But Fingolfin sprang aside, and Grond rent amighty pit in the earth, whence smoke and fire darted. Many times Morgothessayed to smite him, and each time Fingolfin leaped away, as a lightning shootsfrom under a dark cloud; and he wounded Morgoth with seven wounds, andseven times Morgoth gave a cry of anguish, whereat the hosts of Angband fellupon their faces in dismay, and the cries echoed in the Northlands.
But at the last the King grew weary, and Morgoth bore down his shield uponhim. Thrice he was crushed to his knees, and thrice arose again and bore up hisbroken shield and stricken helm. But the earth was all rent and pitted about him,and he stumbled and fell backward before the feet of Morgoth; and Morgoth sethis left foot upon his neck, and the weight of it was like a fallen hill. Yet with his
last and desperate stroke Fingolfin hewed the foot with Ringil, and the bloodgushed forth black and smoking and filled the pits of Grand.
Thus died Fingolfin, High King of the Noldor, most proud and valiant of theElven-kings of old. The Ores made no boast of that duel at the gate; neither dothe Elves sing of it, for their sorrow is too deep. Yet the tale of it is rememberedstill, for Thorondor King of Eagles brought the tidings to Gondolin, and toHithlum afar off. And Morgoth took the body of the Elven-king and broke it, andwould cast it to his wolves; but Thorondor came hasting from his eyrie amongthe peaks of the Crissaegrim, and he stooped upon Morgoth and marred his face.The rushing of the wings of Thorondor was like the noise of the winds ofManwe, and he seized the body in his mighty talons, and soaring suddenly abovethe darts of the Ores he bore the King away. And he laid him upon a mountain-top that looked from the north upon the hidden valley of Gondolin; and Turgoncoming built a high cairn over his father. No Ore dared ever after to pass overthe mount of Fingolfin or draw nigh his tomb, until the doom of Gondolin wascome and treachery was born among his kin. Morgoth went ever halt of one footafter that day, and the pain of his wounds could not be healed; and in his facewas the scar that Thorondor made.
Great was the lamentation in Hithlum when the fall of Fingolfin becameknown, and Fingon in sorrow took the lordship of the house of Fingolfin and thekingdom of the Noldor; but his young son Ereinion (who was after named Gil-galad) he sent to the Havens.
Now Morgoth’s power overshadowed the Northlands; but Barahir would notflee from Dorthonion, and remained contesting the land foot by foot with hisenemies. Then Morgoth pursued his people to the death, until few remained; andall the forest of the northward slopes of that land was turned little by little into aregion of such dread and dark enchantment that even the Ores would not enter itunless need drove them, and it was called Delduwath, and Taur-nu-Fuin, TheForest under Nightshade. The trees that grew there after the burning were blackand grim, and their roots were tangled, groping in the dark like claws; and thosewho strayed among them became lost and blind, and were strangled or pursuedto madness by phantoms of terror. At last so desperate was the case of Barahirthat Emeldir the Manhearted his wife (whose mind was rather to fight beside herson and her husband than to flee) gathered together all the women and childrenthat were left, and gave arms to those that would bear them; and she led theminto the mountains that lay behind, and so by perilous paths, until they came atlast with loss and misery to Brethil. Some were there received among the
Haladin, but some passed on over the mountains to Dorlomin and the people ofGaldor, Hador’s son; and among those were Rian, daughter of Belegund, andMorwen, who was named Eledhwen, that is Elfsheen, daughter of Baragund. Butnone ever saw again the men that they had left. For these were slain one by one,until at last only twelve men remained to Barahir: Beren his son, and Baragundand Belegund his nephews, the sons of Bregolas, and nine faithful servants of hishouse whose names were long remembered in the songs of the Noldor: Radhruinand Dairuin they were, Dagnir and Ragnor, Gildor and Gorlim the unhappy,Arthad and Urthel, and Hathaldir the young. Outlaws without hope they became,a desperate band that could not escape and would not yield, for their dwellingswere destroyed, and their wives and children captured, slain, or fled. FromHithlum there came neither news nor help, and Barahir and his men were huntedlike wild beasts; and they retreated to the barren highland above the forest, andwandered among the tarns and rocky moors of that region, furthest from thespies and spells of Morgoth. Their bed was the heather and their roof the cloudysky.
For nigh on two years after the Dagor Bragollach the Noldor still defended thewestern pass about the sources of Sirion, for the power of Ulmo was in thatwater, and Minas Tirith withstood the Ores. But at length, after the fall ofFingolfin, Sauron, greatest and most terrible of the servants of Morgoth, who inthe Sindarin tongue was named Gorthaur, came against Orodreth, the warden ofthe tower upon Tol Sirion. Sauron was become now a sorcerer of dreadfulpower, master of shadows and of phantoms, foul in wisdom, cruel in strength,misshaping what he touched, twisting what he ruled, lord of werewolves; hisdominion was torment. He took Minas Tirith by assault, for a dark cloud of fearfell upon those that defended it; and Orodreth was driven out, and fled toNargothrond. Then Sauron made it into a watch-tower for Morgoth, a strongholdof evil, and a menace; and the fair isle of Tol Sirion became accursed, and it wascalled Tol-in-Gaurhoth, the Isle of Werewolves. No living creature could passthrough that vale that Sauron did not espy from the tower where he sat. AndMorgoth held now the western pass, and his terror filled the fields and woods ofBeleriand. Beyond Hithlum he pursued his foes relentlessly, and he searched outtheir hiding-places and took their strongholds one by one. The Ores growingever bolder wandered at will far and wide, coming down Sirion in the west andCelon in the east, and they encompassed Doriath; and they harried the lands sothat beast and bird fled before them, and silence and desolation spread steadilyfrom the North. Many of the Noldor and the Sindar they took captive and led toAngband, and made them thralls, forcing them to use their skill and theirknowledge in the service of Morgoth. And Morgoth sent out his spies, and theywere clad in false forms and deceit was in their speech; they made lyingpromises of reward, and with cunning words sought to arouse fear and jealousyamong the peoples, accusing their kings and chieftains of greed, and of treacheryone to another. And because of the curse of the Kinslaying at Alqualonde theselies were often believed; and indeed as the time darkened they had a measure oftruth, for the hearts and minds of the Elves of Beleriand became clouded withdespair and fear. But ever the Noldor feared most the treachery of those of theirown kin, who had been thralls in Angband; for Morgoth used some of these forhis evil purposes, and feigning to give them liberty sent them abroad, but theirwills were chained to his, and they strayed only to come back to him again.Therefore if any of his captives escaped in truth, and returned to their ownpeople, they had little welcome, and wandered alone outlawed and desperate.
To Men Morgoth feigned pity, if any would hearken to his messages, saying
that their woes came only of their servitude to the rebel Noldor, but at the handsof the rightful Lord of Middle-earth they would get honour and a just reward ofvalour, if they would leave rebellion. But few men of the Three Houses of theEdain would give ear to him, not even were they brought to the torment ofAngband. Therefore Morgoth pursued them with hatred; and he sent hismessengers over the mountains.
It is told that at this time the Swarthy Men came first into Beleriand. Somewere already secretly under the dominion of Morgoth, and came at his call; butnot all, for the rumour of Beleriand, of its lands and waters, of its wars andriches, went now far and wide, and the wandering feet of Men were ever setwestward in those days. These Men were short and broad, long and strong in thearm; their skins were swart or sallow, and their hair was dark as were their eyes.Their houses were many, and some had greater liking for the Dwarves of themountains than for the Elves. But Maedhros, knowing the weakness of theNoldor and the Edain, whereas the pits of Angband seemed to hold storeinexhaustible and ever-renewed, made alliance with these new-come Men, andgave his friendship to the greatest of their chieftains, Bor and Ulfang. AndMorgoth was well content; for this was as he had designed. The sons of Borwere Borlad, Borlach, and Borthand; and they followed Maedhros and Maglor,and cheated the hope of Morgoth, and were faithful. The sons of Ulfang theBlack were Ulfast, and Ulwarth, and Uldor the accursed; and they followedCaranthir and swore allegiance to him, and proved faithless.
There was small love between the Edain and the Easterlings, and they metseldom; for the newcomers abode long in East Beleriand, but Hador’s folk wereshut in Hithlum, and Beor’s house was wellnigh destroyed. The People of Halethwere at first untouched by the northern war, for they dwelt to the southward inthe Forest of Brethil; but now there was battle between them and the invadingOres, for they were stout-hearted men and would not lightly forsake the woodsthat they loved. And amid the tale of defeats of that time the deeds of theHaladin are remembered with honour: for after the taking of Minas Tirith theOres came through the western pass, and maybe would have ravaged even to themouths of Sirion; but Halmir lord of the Haladin sent swift word to Thingol, forhe had friendship with the Elves that guarded the borders of Doriath. Then BelegStrongbow, chief of the marchwardens of Thingol, brought great strength of theSindar armed with axes into Brethil; and issuing from the deeps of the forestHalmir and Beleg took an Orc-legion at unawares and destroyed it. Thereafterthe black tide out of the North was stemmed in that region, and the Ores darednot cross the Teiglin for many years after. The People of Haleth dwelt yet inwatchful peace in the Forest of Brethil, and behind their guard the Kingdom of
Nargothrond had respite, and mustered its strength.
At this time Hurin and Huor, the sons of Galdor of Dorlomin, were dwellingwith the Haladin, for they were akin. In the days before the Dagor Bragollachthose two houses of the Edain were joined at a great feast, when Galdor andGloredhel the children of Hador Goldenhead were wedded to Hareth and Haldirthe children of Halmir lord of the Haladin. Thus it was that the sons of Galdorwere fostered in Brethil by Haldir their uncle, according to the custom of Men inthat time; and they went both to that battle with the Ores, even Huor, for hewould not be restrained, though he was but thirteen years old. But being with acompany that was cut off from the rest they were pursued to the Ford ofBrithiach, and there they would have been taken or slain but for the power ofUlmo, that was still strong in Sirion. A mist arose from the river and hid themfrom their enemies, and they escaped over the Brithiach into Dimbar, andwandered among the hills beneath the sheer walls of the Crissaegrim, until theywere bewildered in the deceits of that land and knew not the way to go on or toreturn. There Thorondor espied them, and he sent two of his eagles to their aid;and the eagles bore them up and brought them beyond the Encircling Mountainsto the secret vale of Tumladen and the hidden city of Gondolin, which no Manyet had seen.
There Turgon the King received them well, when he learned of their kin; formessages and dreams had come to him up Sirion from the sea, from Ulmo, Lordof Waters, warning him of woe to come and counselling him to deal kindly withthe sons of the house of Hador, from whom help should come to him at need.Hurin and Huor dwelt as guests in the King’s house for well nigh a year; and it issaid that in this time Hurin learned much lore of the Elves, and understood alsosomething of the counsels and purposes of the King. For Turgon took greatliking for the sons of Galdor, and spoke much with them; and he wished indeedto keep them in Gondolin out of love, and not only for his law that no stranger,be he Elf or Man, who found the way to the secret kingdom and looked upon thecity should ever depart again, until the King should open the leaguer, and thehidden people should come forth.
But Hurin and Huor desired to return to their own people and share in thewars and griefs that now beset them. And Hurin said to Turgon: 'Lord, we arebut mortal Men, and unlike the Eldar. They may endure for long years awaitingbattle with their enemies in some far distant day; but for us the time is short, andour hope and strength soon wither. Moreover we did not find the road toGondolin, and indeed we do not know surely where this city stands; for we werebrought in fear and wonder by the high ways of the air, and in mercy our eyeswere veiled.’ Then Turgon granted his prayer, and he said: ‘By the way that you
came you have leave to depart, if Thorondor is willing. I grieve at this parting;yet in a little while, as the Eldar account it, we may meet again.’
But Maeglin, the King’s sister-son, who was mighty in Gondolin, grieved notat all at their going, though he begrudged them the favour of the King, for he hadno love for any of the kindred of Men; and he said to Hurin: The King’s grace isgreater than you know, and the law is become less stern than aforetime; or elseno choice would be given you but to abide here to your life’s end.’
Then Hurin answered him: The King’s grace is great indeed; but if our wordis not enough, then we will swear oaths to you.’ And the brothers swore never toreveal the counsels of Turgon, and to keep secret all that they had seen in hisrealm. Then they took their leave, and the eagles coming bore them away bynight, and set them down in Dor-lomin before the dawn. Their kinsfolk rejoicedto see them, for messengers from Brethil had reported that they were lost; butthey would not declare even to their father where they had been, save that theywere rescued in the wilderness by the eagles that brought them home. ButGaldor said: ‘Did you then dwell a year in the wild? Or did the eagles house youin their eyries? But you found food and fine raiment, and return as youngprinces, not as waifs of the wood.’ And Hurin answered: ‘Be content that wehave returned; for only under an oath of silence was this permitted.’ Then Galdorquestioned them no more, but he and many others guessed at the truth; and intime the strange fortune of Hurin and Huor reached the ears of the servants ofMorgoth.
Now when Turgon learned of the breaking of the leaguer of Angband hewould not suffer any of his own people to issue forth to war; for he deemed thatGondolin was strong, and the time not yet ripe for its revealing. But he believedalso that the ending of the Siege was the beginning of the downfall of theNoldor, unless aid should come; and he sent companies of the Gondolindrim insecret to the mouths of Sirion and the Isle of Balar. There they built ships, andset sail into the uttermost West upon Turgon’s errand, seeking for Valinor, to askfor pardon and aid of the Valar; and they besought the birds of the sea to guidethem. But the seas were wild and wide, and shadow and enchantment lay uponthem; and Valinor was hidden. Therefore none of the messengers of Turgoncame into the West, and many were lost and few returned; but the doom ofGondolin drew nearer.
Rumour came to Morgoth of these things, and he was unquiet amid hisvictories; and he desired greatly to learn tidings of Felagund and Turgon. Forthey had vanished out of knowledge, and yet were not dead; and he feared whatthey might yet accomplish against him. Of Nargothrond he knew indeed thename, but neither its place nor its strength; and of Gondolin he knew nothing,
and the thought of Turgon troubled him the more. Therefore he sent forth evermore spies into Beleriand; but he recalled the main hosts of the Ores toAngband, for he perceived that he could not yet make a final and victoriousbattle until he had gathered new strength, and that he had not measured rightlythe valour of the Noldor nor the might in arms of the Men that fought besidethem. Great though his victory had been in the Bragollach and in the years after,and grievous the harm that he had done to his enemies, his own loss had been noless; and though he held Dorthonion and the Pass of Sirion, the Eldar recoveringfrom their first dismay began now to regain what they had lost. Thus Beleriandin the south had a semblance of peace again for a few brief years; but the forgesof Angband were full of labour.
When seven years had passed since the Fourth Battle, Morgoth renewed hisassault, and he sent a great force against Hithlum. The attack on the passes of theShadowy Mountains was bitter, and in the siege of Eithel Sirion Galdor the tall,Lord of Dor-lomin, was slain by an arrow. That fortress he held on behalf ofFingon the High King; and in that same place his father Hador Lorindol died buta little time before. Hurin his son was then newly come to manhood, but he wasgreat in strength both of mind and body; and he drove the Ores with heavyslaughter from Ered Wethrin, and pursued them far across the sands ofAnfauglith.
But King Fingon was hard put to it to hold back the army of Angband thatcame down from the north; and battle was joined upon the very plains ofHithlum. There Fingon was outnumbered; but the ships of Cirdan sailed in greatstrength up the Firth of Drengist, and in the hour of need the Elves of the Falascame upon the host of Morgoth from the west. Then the Ores broke and fled, andthe Eldar had the victory, and their horsed archers pursued them even into theIron Mountains.
Thereafter Hurin son of Galdor ruled the house of Hador in Dor-lomin, andserved Fingon. Hurin was of less stature than his fathers, or his son after him;but he was tireless and enduring in body, lithe and swift after the manner of hismother’s kin, Hareth of the Haladin. His wife was Morwen Eledhwen, daughterof Baragund of the house of Beor, she who fled from Dorthonion with Riandaughter of Belegund and Emeldir the mother of Beren.
In that time also the outlaws of Dorthonion were destroyed, as is toldhereafter; and Beren son of Barahir alone escaping came hardly into Doriath.
CHAPTER 19
OF BEREN AND LUTHIEN
Among the tales of sorrow and of min that come down to us from the darknessof those days there are yet some in which amid weeping there is joy and underthe shadow of death light that endures. And of these histories most fair still inthe ears of the Elves is the tale of Beren and Luthien. Of their lives was made theLay of Leithian, Release from Bondage, which is the longest save one of thesongs concerning the world of old; but here the tale is told in fewer words andwithout song.
It has been told that Barahir would not forsake Dorthonion, and there Morgothpursued him to the death, until at last there remained to him only twelvecompanions. Now the forest of Dorthonion rose southward into mountainousmoors; and in the east of those highlands there lay a lake, Tarn Aeluin, with wildheaths about it, and all that land was pathless and untamed, for even in the daysof the Long Peace none had dwelt there. But the waters of Tarn Aeluin were heldin reverence, for they were clear and blue by day and by night were a mirror forthe stars; and it was said that Melian herself had hallowed that water in days ofold. Thither Barahir and his outlaws withdrew, and there made their lair, andMorgoth could not discover it. But the rumour of the deeds of Barahir and hiscompanions went far and wide; and Morgoth commanded Sauron to find themand destroy them.
Now among the companions of Barahir was Gorlim son of Angrim. His wifewas named Eilinel, and their love was great, ere evil befell. But Gorlim returningfrom the war upon the marches found his house plundered and forsaken, and hiswife gone; whether slain or taken he knew not. Then he fled to Barahir, and ofhis companions he was the most fierce and desperate; but doubt gnawed hisheart, thinking that perhaps Eilinel was not dead. At times he would depart aloneand secretly, and visit his house that still stood amid the fields and woods he hadonce possessed; and this became known to the servants of Morgoth.
On a time of autumn he came in the dusk of evening, and drawing near he sawas he thought a light at the window; and coming warily he looked within. Therehe saw Eilinel, and her face was worn with grief and hunger, and it seemed tohim that he heard her voice lamenting that he had forsaken her. But even as hecried aloud the light was blown out in the wind; wolves howled, and on hisshoulders he felt suddenly the heavy hands of Sauron’s hunters. Thus Gorlimwas ensnared; and taking him to their camp they tormented him, seeking to learnthe hidings of Barahir and all his ways. But nothing would Gorlim tell. Thenthey promised him that he should be released and restored to Eilinel, if he would
yield; and being at last worn with pain, and yearning for his wife, he faltered.Then straightway they brought him into the dreadful presence of Sauron; andSauron said: T hear now that thou wouldst barter with me. What is thy price?’
And Gorlim answered that he should find Eilinel again, and with her be setfree; for he thought that Eilinel also had been made captive.
Then Sauron smiled, saying: ‘That is a small price for so great a treachery. Soshall it surely be. Say on!’
Now Gorlim would have drawn back, but daunted by the eyes of Sauron hetold at last all that he would know. Then Sauron laughed; and he mockedGorlim, and revealed to him that he had seen only a phantom devised bywizardry to entrap him; for Eilinel was dead. ‘Nonetheless I will grant thyprayer,’ said Sauron; ‘and thou shalt go to Eilinel, and be set free of my service.’Then he put him cruelly to death.
In this way the hiding of Barahir was revealed, and Morgoth drew his netabout it; and the Ores coming in the still hours before dawn surprised the Men ofDorthonion and slew them all, save one. For Beren son of Barahir had been sentby his father on a perilous errand to spy upon the ways of the Enemy, and he wasfar afield when the lair was taken. But as he slept benighted in the forest hedreamed that carrion-birds sat thick as leaves upon bare trees beside a mere, andblood dripped from their beaks. Then Beren was aware in his dream of a formthat came to him across the water, and it was a wraith of Gorlim; and it spoke tohim declaring his treachery and death, and bade him make haste to warn hisfather.
Then Beren awoke, and sped through the night, and came back to the lair ofthe outlaws on the second morning. But as he drew near the carrion-birds rosefrom the ground and sat in the alder-trees beside Tarn Aeluin, and croaked inmockery.
There Beren buried his father’s bones, and raised a cairn of boulders abovehim, and swore upon it an oath of vengeance. First therefore he pursued the Oresthat had slain his father and his kinsmen, and he found their camp by night atRivil’s Well above the Fen of Serech, and because of his woodcraft he came nearto their fire unseen. There their captain made boast of his deeds, and he held upthe hand of Barahir that he had cut off as a token for Sauron that their missionwas fulfilled; and the ring of Felagund was on that hand. Then Beren sprangfrom behind a rock, and slew the captain, and taking the hand and the ring heescaped, being defended by fate; for the Ores were dismayed, and their arrowswild.
Thereafter for four years more Beren wandered still upon Dorthonion, asolitary outlaw; but he became the friend of birds and beasts, and they aided him,and did not betray him, and from that time forth he ate no flesh nor slew anyliving thing that was not in the service of Morgoth. He did not fear death, butonly captivity, and being bold and desperate he escaped both death and bonds;and the deeds of lonely daring that he achieved were noised abroad throughoutBeleriand, and the tale of them came even into Doriath. At length Morgoth set aprice upon his head no less than the price upon the head of Fingon, High King ofthe Noldor; but the Ores fled rather at the rumour of his approach than soughthim out. Therefore an army was sent against him under the command of Sauron;and Sauron brought were-wolves, fell beasts inhabited by dreadful spirits that hehad imprisoned in their bodies.
All that land was now become filled with evil, and all clean things weredeparting from it; and Beren was pressed so hard that at last he was forced toflee from Dorthonion. In time of winter and snow he forsook the land and graveof his father, and climbing into the high regions of Gorgoroth, the Mountains ofTerror, he descried afar the land of Doriath. There it was put into his heart that hewould go down into the Hidden Kingdom, where no mortal foot had yet trodden.
Terrible was his southward journey. Sheer were the precipices of EredGorgoroth, and beneath their feet were shadows that were laid before the risingof the Moon. Beyond lay the wilderness of Dungortheb, where the sorcery ofSauron and the power of Melian came together, and horror and madness walked.There spiders of the fell race of Ungoliant abode, spinning their unseen webs inwhich all living things were snared; and monsters wandered there that were bornin the long dark before the Sun, hunting silently with many eyes. No food forElves or Men was there in that haunted land, but death only. That journey is notaccounted least among the great deeds of Beren, but he spoke of it to no oneafter, lest the horror return into his mind; and none know how he found a way,and so came by paths that no Man nor Elf else ever dared to tread to the bordersof Doriath. And he passed through the mazes that Melian wove about thekingdom of Thingol, even as she had foretold; for a great doom lay upon him.
It is told in the Lay of Leithian that Beren came stumbling into Doriath greyand bowed as with many years of woe, so great had been the torment of the road.But wandering in the summer in the woods of Neldoreth he came upon Luthien,daughter of Thingol and Melian, at a time of evening under moonrise, as shedanced upon the unfading grass in the glades beside Esgalduin. Then all memory
of his pain departed from him, and he fell into an enchantment; for Luthien wasthe most beautiful of all the Children of Iluvatar. Blue was her raiment as theunclouded heaven, but her eyes were grey as the starlit evening; her mantle wassewn with golden flowers, but her hair was dark as the shadows of twilight. Asthe light upon the leaves of trees, as the voice of clear waters, as the stars abovethe mists of the world, such was her glory and her loveliness; and in her face wasa shining light.
But she vanished from his sight; and he became dumb, as one that is boundunder a spell, and he strayed long in the woods, wild and wary as a beast,seeking for her. In his heart he called her Tinuviel, that signifies Nightingale,daughter of twilight, in the Grey-elven tongue, for he knew no other name forher. And he saw her afar as leaves in the winds of autumn, and in winter as a starupon a hill, but a chain was upon his limbs.
There came a time near dawn on the eve of spring, and Luthien danced upon agreen hill; and suddenly she began to sing. Keen, heart-piercing was her song asthe song of the lark that rises from the gates of night and pours its voice amongthe dying stars, seeing the sun behind the walls of the world; and the song ofLuthien released the bonds of winter, and the frozen waters spoke, and flowerssprang from the cold earth where her feet had passed.
Then the spell of silence fell from Beren, and he called to her, crying Tinuviel;and the woods echoed the name. Then she halted in wonder, and fled no more,and Beren came to her. But as she looked on him, doom fell upon her, and sheloved him; yet she slipped from his arms and vanished from his sight even as theday was breaking. Then Beren lay upon the ground in a swoon, as one slain atonce by bliss and grief; and he fell into a sleep as it were into an abyss ofshadow, and waking he was cold as stone, and his heart barren and forsaken.And wandering in mind he groped as one that is stricken with sudden blindness,and seeks with hands to grasp the vanished light. Thus he began the payment ofanguish for the fate that was laid on him; and in his fate Luthien was caught, andbeing immortal she shared in his mortality, and being free received his chain;and her anguish was greater than any other of the Eldalie has known.
Beyond his hope she returned to him where he sat in darkness, and long ago inthe Hidden Kingdom she laid her hand in his. Thereafter often she came to him,and they went in secret through the woods together from spring to summer; andno others of the Children of Iluvatar have had joy so great, though the time wasbrief.
But Daeron the minstrel also loved Luthien, and he espied her meetings withBeren, and betrayed them to Thingol. Then the King was filled with anger, forLuthien he loved above all things, setting her above all the princes of the Elves;
whereas mortal Men he did not even take into his service. Therefore he spoke ingrief and amazement to Luthien; but she would reveal nothing, until he swore anoath to her that he would neither slay Beren nor imprison him. But he sent hisservants to lay hands on him and lead him to Menegroth as a malefactor; andLuthien forestalling them led Beren herself before the throne of Thingol, as if hewere an honoured guest.
Then Thingol looked upon Beren in scorn and anger; but Melian was silent.‘Who are you/ said the King, ‘that come hither as a thief, and unbidden dare toapproach my throne?’
But Beren being filled with dread, for the splendour of Menegroth and themajesty of Thingol were very great, answered nothing. Therefore Luthien spoke,and said: ‘He is Beren son of Barahir, lord of Men, mighty foe of Morgoth, thetale of whose deeds is become a song even among the Elves.’
‘Let Beren speak!’ said Thingol. ‘What would you here, unhappy mortal, andfor what cause have you left your own land to enter this, which is forbidden tosuch as you? Can you show reason why my power should not be laid on you inheavy punishment for your insolence and folly?’
Then Beren looking up beheld the eyes of Luthien, and his glance went also tothe face of Melian; and it seemed to him that words were put into his mouth.Fear left him, and the pride of the eldest house of Men returned to him; and hesaid: ‘My fate, O King, led me hither, through perils such as few even of theElves would dare. And here I have found what I sought not indeed, but finding Iwould possess for ever. For it is above all gold and silver, and beyond all jewels.Neither rock, nor steel, nor the fires of Morgoth, nor all the powers of the Elf-kingdoms, shall keep from me the treasure that I desire. For Luthien yourdaughter is the fairest of all the Children of the World.’
Then silence fell upon the hall, for those that stood there were astounded andafraid, and they thought that Beren would be slain. But Thingol spoke slowly,saying: ‘Death you have earned with these words; and death you should findsuddenly, had I not sworn an oath in haste; of which I repent, baseborn mortal,who in the realm of Morgoth has learnt to creep in secret as his spies and thralls.’
Then Beren answered: ‘Death you can give me earned or unearned; but thenames I will not take from you of baseborn, nor spy, nor thrall. By the ring ofFelagund, that he gave to Barahir my father on the battlefield of the North, myhouse has not earned such names from any Elf, be he king or no.’
His words were proud, and all eyes looked upon the ring; for he held it nowaloft, and the green jewels gleamed there that the Noldor had devised in Valinor.For this ring was like to twin serpents, whose eyes were emeralds, and theirheads met beneath a crown of golden flowers, that the one upheld and the other
devoured; that was the badge of Finarfin and his house. Then Melian leaned toThingol’s side, and in whispered counsel bade him forgo his wrath. Tor not byyou,’ she said, 'shall Beren be slain; and far and free does his fate lead him in theend, yet it is wound with yours. Take heed!’
But Thingol looked in silence upon Luthien; and he thought in his heart:'Unhappy Men, children of little lords and brief kings, shall such as these layhands on you, and yet live?’ Then breaking the silence he said: ‘I see the ring,son of Barahir, and I perceive that you are proud, and deem yourself mighty. Buta father’s deeds, even had his service been rendered to me, avail not to win thedaughter of Thingol and Melian. See now! I too desire a treasure that iswithheld. For rock and steel and the fires of Morgoth keep the jewel that I wouldpossess against all the powers of the Elf-kingdoms. Yet I hear you say that bondssuch as these do not daunt you. Go your way therefore! Bring to me in your handa Silmaril from Morgoth’s crown; and then, if she will, Luthien may set her handin yours. Then you shall have my jewel; and though the fate of Arda lie withinthe Silmarils, yet you shall hold me generous.’
Thus he wrought the doom of Doriath, and was ensnared within the curse ofMandos. And those that heard these words perceived that Thingol would savehis oath, and yet send Beren to his death; for they knew that not all the power ofthe Noldor, before the Siege was broken, had availed even to see from afar theshining Silmarils of Feanor. For they were set in the Iron Crown, and treasuredin Angband above all wealth; and Balrogs were about them, and countlessswords, and strong bars, and unassailable walls, and the dark majesty ofMorgoth.
But Beren laughed. 'For little price,’ he said, 'do Elven-kings sell theirdaughters: for gems, and things made by craft. But if this be your will, Thingol, Iwill perform it. And when we meet again my hand shall hold a Silmaril from theIron Crown; for you have not looked the last upon Beren son of Barahir.’
Then he looked in the eyes of Melian, who spoke not; and he bade farewell toLuthien Tinuviel, and bowing before Thingol and Melian he put aside the guardsabout him, and departed from Menegroth alone.
Then at last Melian spoke, and she said to Thingol: ‘O King, you have devisedcunning counsel. But if my eyes have not lost their sight, it is ill for you, whetherBeren fail in his errand, or achieve it. For you have doomed either your daughter,or yourself. And now is Doriath drawn within the fate of a mightier realm.’
But Thingol answered: ‘I sell not to Elves or Men those whom I love andcherish above all treasure. And if there were hope or fear that Beren shouldcome ever back alive to Menegroth, he should not have looked again upon thelight of heaven, though I had sworn it.’
But Luthien was silent, and from that hour she sang not again in Doriath. Abrooding silence fell upon the woods, and the shadows lengthened in thekingdom of Thingol.
It is told in the Lay of Leithian that Beren passed through Doriath unhindered,and came at length to the region of the Twilight Meres, and the Fens of Sirion;and leaving Thingol’s land he climbed the hills above the Falls of Sirion, wherethe river plunged underground with great noise. Thence he looked westward, andthrough the mist and rains that lay upon those hills he saw Talath Dirnen, theGuarded Plain, stretching between Sirion and Narog; and beyond he descriedafar the highlands of Taur-en-Faroth that rose above Nargothrond. And beingdestitute, without hope or counsel, he turned his feet thither.
Upon all that plain the Elves of Nargothrond kept unceasing watch; and everyhill upon its borders was crowned with hidden towers, and through all its woodsand fields archers ranged secretly and with great craft. Their arrows were sureand deadly, and nothing crept there against their will. Therefore, ere Beren hadcome far upon his road, they were aware of him, and his death was nigh. Butknowing his danger he held ever aloft the ring of Felagund; and though he sawno living thing, because of the stealth of the hunters, he felt that he was watched,and cried often aloud: T am Beren son of Barahir, friend of Felagund. Take meto the King!’
Therefore the hunters slew him not, but assembling they waylaid him, andcommanded him to halt. But seeing the ring they bowed before him, though hewas in evil plight, wild and wayworn; and they led him northward and westward,going by night lest their paths should be revealed. For at that time there was noford or bridge over the torrent of Narog before the gates of Nargothrond; butfurther to the north, where Ginglith joined Narog, the flood was less, andcrossing there and turning again southward the Elves led Beren under the light ofthe moon to the dark gates of their hidden halls.
Thus Beren came before King Finrod Felagund; and Felagund knew him,needing no ring to remind him of the kin of Beor and of Barahir. Behind closeddoors they sat, and Beren told of the death of Barahir, and of all that had befallenhim in Doriath; and he wept, recalling Luthien and their joy together. ButFelagund heard his tale in wonder and disquiet; and he knew that the oath he hadsworn was come upon him for his death, as long before he had foretold toGaladriel. He spoke then to Beren in heaviness of heart. Tt is plain that Thingoldesires your death; but it seems that this doom goes beyond his purpose, and thatthe Oath of Feanor is again at work. For the Silmarils are cursed with an oath of
hatred, and he that even names them in desire moves a great power fromslumber; and the sons of Feanor would lay all the Elf-kingdoms in ruin ratherthan suffer any other than themselves to win or possess a Silmaril, for the Oathdrives them. And now Celegorm and Curufin are dwelling in my halls; andthough I, Finarfin’s son, am King, they have won a strong power in the realm,and lead many of their own people. They have shown friendship to me in everyneed, but I fear that they will show neither love nor mercy to you, if your questbe told. Yet my own oath holds; and thus we are all ensnared . 5
Then King Felagund spoke before his people, recalling the deeds of Barahir,and his vow; and he declared that it was laid upon him to aid the son of Barahirin his need, and he sought the help of his chieftains. Then Celegorm arose amidthe throng, and drawing his sword he cried: 'Be he friend or foe, whether demonof Morgoth, or Elf, or child of Men, or any other living thing in Arda, neitherlaw, nor love, nor league of hell, nor might of the Valar, nor any power ofwizardry, shall defend him from the pursuing hate of Feanor’s sons, if he take orfind a Silmaril and keep it. For the Silmarils we alone claim, until the worldends . 5
Many other words he spoke, as potent as were long before in Tirion the wordsof his father that first inflamed the Noldor to rebellion. And after CelegormCurufin spoke, more softly but with no less power, conjuring in the minds of theElves a vision of war and the ruin of Nargothrond. So great a fear did he set intheir hearts that never after until the time of Turin would any Elf of that realm gointo open battle; but with stealth and ambush, with wizardry and venomed dart,they pursued all strangers, forgetting the bonds of kinship. Thus they fell fromthe valour and freedom of the Elves of old, and their land was darkened.
And now they murmured that Finarfin’s son was not as a Vala to commandthem, and they turned their faces from him. But the curse of Mandos came uponthe brothers, and dark thoughts arose in their hearts, thinking to send forthFelagund alone to his death, and to usurp, it might be, the throne of Nargothrond;for they were of the eldest line of the princes of the Noldor.
And Felagund seeing that he was forsaken took from his head the silver crownof Nargothrond and cast it at his feet, saying: 'Your oaths of faith to me you maybreak, but I must hold my bond. Yet if there be any on whom the shadow of ourcurse has not yet fallen, I should find at least a few to follow me, and should notgo hence as a beggar that is thrust from the gates.’ There were ten that stood byhim; and the chief of them, who was named Edrahil, stooping lifted the crownand asked that it be given to a steward until Felagund’s return. 'For you remainmy king, and theirs,’ he said, ‘whatever betide.’
Then Felagund gave the crown of Nargothrond to Orodreth his brother to
govern in his stead; and Celegorm and Curufin said nothing, but they smiled andwent from the halls.
On an evening of autumn Felagund and Beren set out from Nargothrond withtheir ten companions; and they journeyed beside Narog to his source in the Fallsof Ivrin. Beneath the Shadowy Mountains they came upon a company of Ores,and slew them all in their camp by night; and they took their gear and theirweapons. By the arts of Felagund their own forms and faces were changed intothe likeness of Ores; and thus disguised they came far upon their northward road,and ventured into the western pass, between Ered Wethrin and the highlands ofTaur-nu-Fuin. But Sauron in his tower was ware of them, and doubt took him;for they went in haste, and stayed not to report their deeds, as was commandedto all the servants of Morgoth that passed that way. Therefore he sent to waylaythem, and bring them before him.
Thus befell the contest of Sauron and Felagund which is renowned. ForFelagund strove with Sauron in songs of power, and the power of the King wasvery great; but Sauron had the mastery, as is told in the Lay of Leithian:
He chanted a song of wizardry,
Of piercing, opening, of treachery,
Revealing, uncovering, betraying.
Then sudden Felagund there swayingSang in answer a song of staying,
Resisting, battling against power,
Of secrets kept, strength like a tower,
And trust unbroken, freedom, escape;
Of changing and of shifting shape,
Of snares eluded, broken traps,
The prison opening, the chain that snaps.
Backwards and forwards swayed their song.Reeling and foundering, as ever more strongThe chanting swelled, Felagund fought,
And all the magic and might he broughtOf Elvenesse into his words.
Softly in the gloom they heard the birdsSinging afar in Nargothrond,
The sighing of the Sea beyond,
Beyond the western world, on sand,
On sand of pearls in Elvenland.
Then the gloom gathered; darkness growingIn Valinor, the red blood flowingBeside the Sea, where the Noldor slewThe Foamriders, and stealing drewTheir white ships with their white sailsFrom lamplit havens. The wind wails,
The wolf howls. The ravens flee.
The ice mutters in the mouths of the Sea.
The captives sad in Angband mourn.
Thunder rumbles, the fires burn —
And Finrod fell before the throne.
Then Sauron stripped from them their disguise, and they stood before himnaked and afraid. But though their kinds were revealed, Sauron could notdiscover their names or their purposes.
He cast them therefore into a deep pit, dark and silent, and threatened to slaythem cruelly, unless one would betray the truth to him. From time to time theysaw two eyes kindled in the dark, and a werewolf devoured one of thecompanions; but none betrayed their lord.
In the time when Sauron cast Beren into the pit a weight of horror came uponLuthien’s heart; and going to Melian for counsel she learned that Beren lay in thedungeons of Tol-in-Gaurhoth without hope of rescue. Then Luthien, perceivingthat no help would come from any other on earth, resolved to fly from Doriathand come herself to him; but she sought the aid of Daeron, and he betrayed herpurpose to the King. Then Thingol was filled with fear and wonder; and becausehe would not deprive Luthien of the lights of heaven, lest she fail and fade, andyet would restrain her, he caused a house to be built from which she should notescape. Not far from the gates of Menegroth stood the greatest of all the trees inthe Forest of Neldoreth; and that was a beech-forest and the northern half of thekingdom. This mighty beech was named Hirilorn, and it had three trunks, equalin girth, smooth in rind, and exceeding tall; no branches grew from them for agreat height above the ground. Far aloft between the shafts of Hirilorn a woodenhouse was built, and there Luthien was made to dwell; and the ladders weretaken away and guarded, save only when the servants of Thingol brought hersuch things as she needed.
It is told in the Lay of Leithian how she escaped from the house in Hirilorn;
for she put forth her arts of enchantment, and caused her hair to grow to greatlength, and of it she wove a dark robe that wrapped her beauty like a shadow,and it was laden with a spell of sleep. Of the strands that remained she twined arope, and she let it down from her window; and as the end swayed above theguards that sat beneath the tree they fell into a deep slumber. Then Luthienclimbed from her prison, and shrouded in her shadowy cloak she escaped fromall eyes, and vanished out of Doriath.
It chanced that Celegorm and Curufin went on a hunt through the GuardedPlain; and this they did because Sauron, being filled with suspicion, sent forthmany wolves into the Elf-lands. Therefore they took their hounds and rode forth;and they thought that ere they returned they might also hear tidings concerningKing Felagund. Now the chief of the wolf-hounds that followed Celegorm wasnamed Huan. He was not born in Middle-earth, but came from the BlessedRealm; for Orome had given him to Celegorm long ago in Valinor, and there hehad followed the horn of his master, before evil came. Huan followed Celegorminto exile, and was faithful; and thus he too came under the doom of woe setupon the Noldor, and it was decreed that he should meet death, but not until heencountered the mightiest wolf that would ever walk the world.
Huan it was that found Luthien flying like a shadow surprised by the daylightunder the trees, when Celegorm and Curufin rested a while near to the westerneaves of Doriath; for nothing could escape the sight and scent of Huan, nor couldany enchantment stay him, and he slept not, neither by night nor day. He broughther to Celegorm, and Luthien, learning that he was a prince of the Noldor and afoe of Morgoth, was glad; and she declared herself, casting aside her cloak. Sogreat was her sudden beauty revealed beneath the sun that Celegorm becameenamoured of her; but he spoke her fair, and promised that she would find helpin her need, if she returned with him now to Nargothrond. By no sign did hereveal that he knew already of Beren and the quest, of which she told, nor that itwas a matter which touched him near.
Thus they broke off the hunt and returned to Nargothrond, and Luthien wasbetrayed; for they held her fast, and took away her cloak, and she was notpermitted to pass the gates or to speak with any save the brothers, Celegorm andCurufin. For now, believing that Beren and Felagund were prisoners beyondhope of aid, they purposed to let the King perish, and to keep Luthien, and forceThingol to give her hand to Celegorm. Thus they would advance their power,and become the mightiest of the princes of the Noldor. And they did not purposeto seek the Silmarils by craft or war, or to suffer any others to do so, until theyhad all the might of the Elf-kingdoms under their hands. Orodreth had no powerto withstand them, for they swayed the hearts of the people of Nargothrond; and
Celegorm sent messengers to Thingol urging his suit.
But Huan the hound was true of heart, and the love of Luthien had fallen uponhim in the first hour of their meeting; and he grieved at her captivity. Thereforehe came often to her chamber; and at night he lay before her door, for he felt thatevil had come to Nargothrond. Luthien spoke often to Huan in her loneliness,telling of Beren, who was the friend of all birds and beasts that did not serveMorgoth; and Huan understood all that was said. For he comprehended thespeech of all things with voice; but it was permitted to him thrice only ere hisdeath to speak with words.
Now Huan devised a plan for the aid of Luthien; and coming at a time of nighthe brought her cloak, and for the first time he spoke, giving her counsel. Then heled her by secret ways out of Nargothrond, and they fled north together; and hehumbled his pride and suffered her to ride upon him in the fashion of a steed,even as the Ores did at times upon great wolves. Thus they made great speed, forHuan was swift and tireless.
In the pits of Sauron Beren and Felagund lay, and all their companions werenow dead; but Sauron purposed to keep Felagund to the last, for he perceivedthat he was a Noldo of great might and wisdom, and he deemed that in him laythe secret of their errand. But when the wolf came for Beren, Felagund put forthall his power, and burst his bonds; and he wrestled with the werewolf, and slewit with his hands and teeth; yet he himself was wounded to the death. Then hespoke to Beren, saying: ‘I go now to my long rest in the timeless halls beyondthe seas and the Mountains of Aman. It will be long ere I am seen among theNoldor again; and it may be that we shall not meet a second time in death or life,for the fates of our kindreds are apart. Farewell!’ He died then in the dark, in Tol-in-Gaurhoth, whose great tower he himself had built. Thus King FinrodFelagund, fairest and most beloved of the house of Finwe, redeemed his oath;but Beren mourned beside him in despair.
In that hour Luthien came, and standing upon the bridge that led to Sauron’sisle she sang a song that no walls of stone could hinder. Beren heard, and hethought that he dreamed; for the stars shone above him, and in the treesnightingales were singing. And in answer he sang a song of challenge that hehad made in praise of the Seven Stars, the Sickle of the Valar that Varda hungabove the North as a sign for the fall of Morgoth. Then all strength left him andhe fell down into darkness.
But Luthien heard his answering voice, and she sang then a song of greaterpower. The wolves howled, and the isle trembled. Sauron stood in the hightower, wrapped in his black thought; but he smiled hearing her voice, for heknew that it was the daughter of Melian. The fame of the beauty of Luthien andthe wonder of her song had long gone forth from Doriath; and he thought tomake her captive and hand her over to the power of Morgoth, for his rewardwould be great.
Therefore he sent a wolf to the bridge. But Huan slew it silently. Still Sauronsent others one by one; and one by one Huan took them by the throat and slewthem. Then Sauron sent Draugluin, a dread beast, old in evil, lord and sire of thewerewolves of Angband. His might was great; and the battle of Huan andDraugluin was long and fierce. Yet at length Draugluin escaped, and fleeing backinto the tower he died before Sauron’s feet; and as he died he told his master:‘Huan is there!’ Now Sauron knew well, as did all in that land, the fate that wasdecreed for the hound of Valinor, and it came into his thought that he himselfwould accomplish it. Therefore he took upon himself the form of a werewolf,
and made himself the mightiest that had yet walked the world; and he came forthto win the passage of the bridge.
So great was the horror of his approach that Huan leaped aside. Then Sauronsprang upon Luthien; and she swooned before the menace of the fell spirit in hiseyes and the foul vapour of his breath. But even as he came, falling she cast afold of her dark cloak before his eyes; and he stumbled, for a fleeting drowsinesscame upon him. Then Huan sprang. There befell the battle of Huan and Wolf-Sauron, and the howls and baying echoed in the hills, and the watchers on thewalls of Ered Wethrin across the valley heard it afar and were dismayed.
But no wizardry nor spell, neither fang nor venom, nor devil’s art nor beast-strength, could overthrow Huan of Valinor; and he took his foe by the throat andpinned him down. Then Sauron shifted shape, from wolf to serpent, and frommonster to his own accustomed form; but he could not elude the grip of Huanwithout forsaking his body utterly. Ere his foul spirit left its dark house, Luthiencame to him, and said that he should be stripped of his raiment of flesh, and hisghost be sent quaking back to Morgoth; and she said: There everlastingly thynaked self shall endure the torment of his scorn, pierced by his eyes, unless thouyield to me the mastery of thy tower.’
Then Sauron yielded himself, and Luthien took the mastery of the isle and allthat was there; and Huan released him. And immediately he took the form of avampire, great as a dark cloud across the moon, and he fled, dripping blood fromhis throat upon the trees, and came to Taur-nu-Fuin, and dwelt there, filling itwith horror.
Then Luthien stood upon the bridge, and declared her power: and the spellwas loosed that bound stone to stone, and the gates were thrown down, and thewalls opened, and the pits laid bare; and many thralls and captives came forth inwonder and dismay, shielding their eyes against the pale moonlight, for they hadlain long in the darkness of Sauron. But Beren came not. Therefore Huan andLuthien sought him in the isle; and Luthien found him mourning by Felagund.So deep was his anguish that he lay still, and did not hear her feet. Then thinkinghim already dead she put her arms about him and fell into a dark forgetfulness.But Beren coming back to the light out of the pits of despair lifted her up, andthey looked again upon one another; and the day rising over the dark hills shoneupon them.
They buried the body of Felagund upon the hill-top of his own isle, and it wasclean again; and the green grave of Finrod Finarfin’s son, fairest of all theprinces of the Elves, remained inviolate, until the land was changed and broken,and foundered under destroying seas. But Finrod walks with Finarfin his fatherbeneath the trees in Eldamar.
Now Beren and Luthien Tinuviel went free again and together walked throughthe woods renewing for a time their joy; and though winter came it hurt themnot, for flowers lingered where Luthien went, and the birds sang beneath thesnowclad hills. But Huan being faithful went back to Celegorm his master; yettheir love was less than before.
There was tumult in Nargothrond. For thither now returned many Elves thathad been prisoners in the isle of Sauron; and a clamour arose that no words ofCelegorm could still. They lamented bitterly the fall of Felagund their king,saying that a maiden had dared that which the sons of Feanor had not dared todo; but many perceived that it was treachery rather than fear that had guidedCelegorm and Curufin. Therefore the hearts of the people of Nargothrond werereleased from their dominion, and turned again to the house of Finarfin; and theyobeyed Orodreth. But he would not suffer them to slay the brothers, as somedesired, for the spilling of kindred blood by kin would bind the curse of Mandosmore closely upon them all. Yet neither bread nor rest would he grant toCelegorm and Curufin within his realm, and he swore that there should be littlelove between Nargothrond and the sons of Feanor thereafter.
'Let it be so!’ said Celegorm, and there was a light of menace in his eyes; butCurufin smiled. Then they took horse and rode away like fire, to find if theymight their kindred in the east. But none would go with them, not even those thatwere of their own people; for all perceived that the curse lay heavily upon thebrothers, and that evil followed them. In that time Celebrimbor the son ofCurufin repudiated the deeds of his father, and remained in Nargothrond; yetHuan followed still the horse of Celegorm his master.
Northward they rode, for they intended in their haste to pass through Dimbar,and along the north marches of Doriath, seeking the swiftest road to Himring,where Maedhros their brother dwelt; and still they might hope with speed totraverse it, since it lay close to Doriath’s borders, shunning Nan Dungortheb andthe distant menace of the Mountains of Terror.
Now it is told that Beren and Luthien came in their wandering into the Forestof Brethil, and drew near at last to the borders of Doriath. Then Beren tookthought of his vow; and against his heart he resolved, when Luthien was comeagain within the safety of her own land, to set forth once more. But she was notwilling to be parted from him again, saying: 'You must choose, Beren, betweenthese two: to relinquish the quest and your oath and seek a life of wanderingupon the face of the earth; or to hold to your word and challenge the power of
darkness upon its throne. But on either road I shall go with you, and our doomshall be alike . 5
Even as they spoke together of these things, walking without heed of aughtelse, Celegorm and Curufin rode up, hastening through the forest; and thebrothers espied them and knew them from afar. Then Celegorm turned his horse,and spurred it upon Beren, purposing to ride him down; but Curufin swervingstooped and lifted Luthien to his saddle, for he was a strong and cunninghorseman. Then Beren sprang from before Celegorm full upon the speedinghorse of Curufin that had passed him; and the Leap of Beren is renowned amongMen and Elves. He took Curufin by the throat from behind, and hurled himbackward, and they fell to the ground together. The horse reared and fell, butLuthien was flung aside, and lay upon the grass.
Then Beren throttled Curufin; but death was near him, for Celegorm rodeupon him with a spear. In that hour Huan forsook the service of Celegorm, andsprang upon him, so that his horse swerved aside, and would not approach Berenbecause of the terror of the great hound. Celegorm cursed both hound and horse,but Huan was unmoved. Then Luthien rising forbade the slaying of Curufin; butBeren despoiled him of his gear and weapons, and took his knife, Angrist. Thatknife was made by Telchar of Nogrod, and hung sheathless by his side; iron itwould cleave as if it were green wood. Then Beren lifting Curufin flung himfrom him, and bade him walk now back to his noble kinsfolk, who might teachhim to turn his valour to worthier use. ‘Your horse,’ he said, ‘I keep for theservice of Luthien, and it may be accounted happy to be free of such a master.’
Then Curufin cursed Beren under cloud and sky. ‘Go hence,’ he said, ‘unto aswift and bitter death.’ Celegorm took him beside him on his horse, and thebrothers made then as if to ride away; and Beren turned away and took no heedof their words. But Curufin, being filled with shame and malice, took the bow ofCelegorm and shot back as they went; and the arrow was aimed at Luthien. Huanleaping caught it in his mouth; but Curufin shot again, and Beren sprang beforeLuthien, and the dart smote him in the breast.
It is told that Huan pursued the sons of Leanor, and they fled in fear; andreturning he brought to Luthien a herb out of the forest. With that leaf shestaunched Beren’s wound, and by her arts and by her love she healed him; andthus at last they returned to Doriath. There Beren, being torn between his oathand his love, and knowing Luthien to be now safe, arose one morning before thesun, and committed her to the care of Huan; then in great anguish he departedwhile she yet slept upon the grass.
He rode northward again with all speed to the Pass of Sirion, and coming tothe skirts of Taur-nu-Luin he looked out across the waste of Anfauglith and saw
afar the peaks of Thangorodrim. There he dismissed the horse of Curufin, andbade it leave now dread and servitude and run free upon the green grass in thelands of Sirion. Then being now alone and upon the threshold of the final perilhe made the Song of Parting, in praise of Luthien and the lights of heaven; for hebelieved that he must now say farewell to both love and light. Of that song thesewords were part:
Farewell sweet earth and northern sky,for ever blest, since here did lieand here with lissom limbs did runbeneath the Moon, beneath the Sun,Luthien Tinuviel
more fair than mortal tongue can tell.
Though all to ruin fell the world
and were dissolved and backward hurled
unmade into the old abyss,
yet were its making good, for this —
the dusk, the dawn, the earth, the sea —
that Luthien for a time should be.
And he sang aloud, caring not what ear should overhear him, for he wasdesperate and looked for no escape.
But Luthien heard his song, and she sang in answer, as she came through thewoods unlooked for. For Huan, consenting once more to be her steed, had borneher swiftly hard upon Beren’s trail. Long he had pondered in his heart whatcounsel he could devise for the lightening of the peril of these two whom heloved. He turned aside therefore at Sauron’s isle, as they ran northward again,and he took thence the ghastly wolf-hame of Draugluin, and the bat-fell ofThuringwethil. She was the messenger of Sauron, and was wont to fly invampire’s form to Angband; and her great fingered wings were barbed at eachjoint’s end with an iron claw. Clad in these dreadful garments Huan and Luthienran through Taur-nu-Fuin, and all things fled before them.
Beren seeing their approach was dismayed; and he wondered, for he had heardthe voice of Tinuviel, and he thought it now a phantom for his ensnaring. Butthey halted and cast aside their disguise, and Luthien ran towards him. ThusBeren and Luthien met again between the desert and the wood. For a while hewas silent, and was glad; but after a space he strove once more to dissuade
Luthien from her journey.
Thrice now I curse my oath to Thingol,’ he said, ‘and I would that he hadslain me in Menegroth, rather than I should bring you under the shadow ofMorgoth.’
Then for the second time Huan spoke with words; and he counselled Beren,saying: ‘From the shadow of death you can no longer save Luthien, for by herlove she is now subject to it. You can turn from your fate and lead her into exile,seeking peace in vain while your life lasts. But if you will not deny your doom,then either Luthien, being forsaken, must assuredly die alone, or she must withyou challenge the fate that lies before you—hopeless, yet not certain. Furthercounsel I cannot give, nor may I go further on your road. But my heart forebodesthat what you find at the Gate I shall myself see. All else is dark to me; yet itmay be that our three paths lead back to Doriath, and we may meet before theend.’
Then Beren perceived that Luthien could not be divided from the doom thatlay upon them both, and he sought no longer to dissuade her. By the counsel ofHuan and the arts of Luthien he was arrayed now in the hame of Draugluin, andshe in the winged fell of Thuringwethil. Beren became in all things like awerewolf to look upon, save that in his eyes there shone a spirit grim indeed butclean; and horror was in his glance as he saw upon his flank a bat-like creatureclinging with creased wings. Then howling under the moon he leaped down thehill, and the bat wheeled and flittered above him.
They passed through all perils, until they came with the dust of their long andweary road upon them to the drear dale that lay before the Gate of Angband.Black chasms opened beside the road, whence forms as of writhing serpentsissued. On either hand the cliffs stood as embattled walls, and upon them satcarrion fowl crying with fell voices. Before them was the impregnable Gate, anarch wide and dark at the foot of the mountain; above it reared a thousand feet ofprecipice.
There dismay took them, for at the gate was a guard of whom no tidings hadyet gone forth. Rumour of he knew not what designs abroad among the princesof the Elves had come to Morgoth, and ever down the aisles of the forest washeard the baying of Huan, the great hound of war, whom long ago the Valarunleashed. Then Morgoth recalled the doom of Huan, and he chose one fromamong the whelps of the race of Draugluin; and he fed him with his own handupon living flesh, and put his power upon him. Swiftly the wolf grew, until hecould creep into no den, but lay huge and hungry before the feet of Morgoth.There the fire and anguish of hell entered into him, and he became filled with adevouring spirit, tormented, terrible, and strong. Carcharoth, the Red Maw, he isnamed in the tales of those days, and Anfauglir, the Jaws of Thirst. And Morgothset him to lie unsleeping before the doors of Angband, lest Huan come.
Now Carcharoth espied them from afar, and he was filled with doubt; for newshad long been brought to Angband that Draugluin was dead. Therefore whenthey approached he denied them entry, and bade them stand; and he drew nearwith menace, scenting something strange in the air about them. But suddenlysome power, descended from of old from divine race, possessed Luthien, andcasting back her foul raiment she stood forth, small before the might ofCarcharoth, but radiant and terrible. Lifting up her hand she commanded him tosleep, saying: £ 0 woe-begotten spirit, fall now into dark oblivion, and forget fora while the dreadful doom of life.’ And Carcharoth was felled, as thoughlightning had smitten him.
Then Beren and Luthien went through the Gate, and down the labyrinthinestairs; and together wrought the greatest deed that has been dared by Elves orMen. Lor they came to the seat of Morgoth in his nethermost hall, that wasupheld by horror, lit by fire, and filled with weapons of death and torment. ThereBeren slunk in wolf’s form beneath his throne; but Luthien was stripped of herdisguise by the will of Morgoth, and he bent his gaze upon her. She was notdaunted by his eyes; and she named her own name, and offered her service to
sing before him, after the manner of a minstrel. Then Morgoth looking upon herbeauty conceived in his thought an evil lust, and a design more dark than anythat had yet come into his heart since he fled from Valinor. Thus he was beguiledby his own malice, for he watched her, leaving her free for a while, and takingsecret pleasure in his thought. Then suddenly she eluded his sight, and out of theshadows began a song of such surpassing loveliness, and of such blinding power,that he listened perforce; and a blindness came upon him, as his eyes roamed toand fro, seeking her.
All his court were cast down in slumber, and all the fires faded and werequenched; but the Silmarils in the crown on Morgoth’s head blazed forthsuddenly with a radiance of white flame; and the burden of that crown and of thejewels bowed down his head, as though the world were set upon it, laden with aweight of care, of fear, and of desire, that even the will of Morgoth could notsupport. Then Luthien catching up her winged robe sprang into the air, and hervoice came dropping down like rain into pools, profound and dark. She cast hercloak before his eyes, and set upon him a dream, dark as the Outer Void whereonce he walked alone. Suddenly he fell, as a hill sliding in avalanche, and hurledlike thunder from his throne lay prone upon the floors of hell. The iron crownrolled echoing from his head. All things were still.
As a dead beast Beren lay upon the ground; but Luthien touching him with herhand aroused him, and he cast aside the wolf-hame. Then he drew forth the knifeAngrist; and from the iron claws that held it he cut a Silmaril.
As he closed it in his hand, the radiance welled through his living flesh, andhis hand became as a shining lamp; but the jewel suffered his touch and hurt himnot. It came then into Beren’s mind that he would go beyond his vow, and bearout of Angband all three of the Jewels of Feanor; but such was not the doom ofthe Silmarils. The knife Angrist snapped, and a shard of the blade flying smotethe cheek of Morgoth. He groaned and stirred, and all the host of Angbandmoved in sleep.
Then terror fell upon Beren and Luthien, and they fled, heedless and withoutdisguise, desiring only to see the light once more. They were neither hinderednor pursued, but the Gate was held against their going out; for Carcharoth hadarisen from sleep, and stood now in wrath upon the threshold of Angband.Before they were aware of him, he saw them, and sprang upon them as they ran.
Luthien was spent, and she had not time nor strength to quell the wolf. ButBeren strode forth before her, and in his right hand he held aloft the Silmaril.Carcharoth halted, and for a moment was afraid. ‘Get you gone, and fly!’ criedBeren; ‘for here is a fire that shall consume you, and all evil things.’ And hethrust the Silmaril before the eyes of the wolf.
But Carcharoth looked upon that holy jewel and was not daunted, and thedevouring spirit within him awoke to sudden fire; and gaping he took suddenlythe hand within his jaws, and he bit it off at the wrist. Then swiftly all hisinwards were filled with a flame of anguish, and the Silmaril seared his accursedflesh. Howling he fled before them, and the walls of the valley of the Gateechoed with the clamour of his torment. So terrible did he become in hismadness that all the creatures of Morgoth that abode in that valley, or were uponany of the roads that led thither, fled far away; for he slew all living things thatstood in his path, and burst from the North with ruin upon the world. Of all theterrors that came ever into Beleriand ere Angband’s fall the madness ofCarcharoth was the most dreadful; for the power of the Silmaril was hiddenwithin him.
Now Beren lay in a swoon within the perilous Gate, and death drew nigh him,for there was venom on the fangs of the wolf. Luthien with her lips drew out thevenom, and she put forth her failing power to staunch the hideous wound. Butbehind her in the depths of Angband the rumour grew of great wrath aroused.The hosts of Morgoth were awakened.
Thus the quest of the Silmaril was like to have ended in ruin and despair; butin that hour above the wall of the valley three mighty birds appeared, flyingnorthward with wings swifter than the wind. Among all birds and beasts thewandering and need of Beren had been noised, and Huan himself had bidden allthings watch, that they might bring him aid. High above the realm of MorgothThorondor and his vassals soared, and seeing now the madness of the Wolf andBeren’s fall they came swiftly down, even as the powers of Angband werereleased from the toils of sleep.
Then they lifted up Luthien and Beren from the earth, and bore them aloft intothe clouds. Below them suddenly thunder rolled, lightnings leaped upward, andthe mountains quaked. Fire and smoke belched forth from Thangorodrim, andflaming bolts were hurled far abroad, falling ruinous upon the lands; and theNoldor in Hithlum trembled. But Thorondor took his way far above the earth,seeking the high roads of heaven, where the sun daylong shines unveiled and themoon walks amid the cloudless stars. Thus they passed swiftly over Dor-nu-Fauglith, and over Taur-nu-Fuin, and came above the hidden valley ofTumladen. No cloud nor mist lay there, and looking down Luthien saw farbelow, as a white light starting from a green jewel, the radiance of Gondolin thefair where Turgon dwelt. But she wept, for she thought that Beren would surelydie; he spoke no word, nor opened his eyes, and knew thereafter nothing of hisflight. And at the last the eagles set them down upon the borders of Doriath; andthey were come to that same dell whence Beren had stolen in despair and left
Luthien asleep.
There the eagles laid her at Beren’s side and returned to the peaks ofCrissaegrim and their high eyries; but Huan came to her, and together theytended Beren, even as before when she healed him of the wound that Curufingave to him. But this wound was fell and poisonous. Long Beren lay, and hisspirit wandered upon the dark borders of death, knowing ever an anguish thatpursued him from dream to dream. Then suddenly, when her hope was almostspent, he woke again, and looked up, seeing leaves against the sky; and he heardbeneath the leaves singing soft and slow beside him Luthien Tinuviel. And itwas spring again.
Thereafter Beren was named Erchamion, which is the One-handed; andsuffering was graven in his face. But at last he was drawn back to life by the loveof Luthien, and he arose, and together they walked in the woods once more. Andthey did not hasten from that place, for it seemed fair to them. Luthien indeedwas willing to wander in the wild without returning, forgetting house and peopleand all the glory of the Elf-kingdoms, and for a time Beren was content; but hecould not for long forget his oath to return to Menegroth, nor would he withholdLuthien from Thingol for ever. For he held by the law of Men, deeming itperilous to set at naught the will of the father, save at the last need; and it seemedalso to him unfit that one so royal and fair as Luthien should live always in thewoods, as the rude hunters among Men, without home or honour or the fairthings which are the delight of the queens of the Eldalie. Therefore after a whilehe persuaded her, and their footsteps forsook the houseless lands; and he passedinto Doriath, leading Luthien home. So their doom willed it.
Upon Doriath evil days had fallen. Grief and silence had come upon all itspeople when Luthien was lost. Long they had sought for her in vain. And it istold that in that time Daeron the minstrel of Thingol strayed from the land, andwas seen no more. He it was that made music for the dance and song of Luthien,before Beren came to Doriath; and he had loved her, and set all his thought ofher in his music. He became the greatest of all the minstrels of the Elves east ofthe Sea, named even before Maglor son of Feanor. But seeking for Luthien indespair he wandered upon strange paths, and passing over the mountains hecame into the East of Middle-earth, where for many ages he made lament besidedark waters for Luthien, daughter of Thingol, most beautiful of all living things.
In that time Thingol turned to Melian; but now she withheld her counsel fromhim, saying that the doom that he had devised must work to its appointed end,and that he must wait now upon time. But Thingol learned that Luthien hadjourneyed far from Doriath, for messages came secretly from Celegorm, as hasbeen told, saying that Felagund was dead, and Beren was dead, but Luthien was
in Nargothrond, and that Celegorm would wed her. Then Thingol was wrathful,and he sent forth spies, thinking to make war upon Nargothrond; and thus helearned that Luthien was again fled, and that Celegorm and Curufin were drivenfrom Nargothrond. Then his counsel was in doubt, for he had not the strength toassail the seven sons of Feanor; but he sent messengers to Himring to summontheir aid in seeking for Luthien, since Celegorm had not sent her to the house ofher father, nor had he kept her safely.
But in the north of his realm his messengers met with a peril sudden andunlooked for: the onslaught of Carcharoth, the Wolf of Angband. In his madnesshe had run ravening from the north, and passing at length over Taur-nu-Fuinupon its eastern side he came down from the sources of Esgalduin like adestroying fire. Nothing hindered him, and the might of Melian upon the bordersof the land stayed him not; for fate drove him, and the power of the Silmaril thathe bore to his torment. Thus he burst into the inviolate woods of Doriath, and allfled away in fear. Alone of the messengers Mablung, chief captain of the King,escaped, and he brought the dread tidings to Thingol.
Even in that dark hour Beren and Luthien returned, hastening from the west,and the news of their coming went before them like a sound of music borne bythe wind into dark houses where men sit sorrowful. They came at last to thegates of Menegroth, and a great host followed them. Then Beren led Luthienbefore the throne of Thingol her father; and he looked in wonder upon Beren,whom he had thought dead; but he loved him not, because of the woes that hehad brought upon Doriath. But Beren knelt before him, and said: T returnaccording to my word. I am come now to claim my own.’
And Thingol answered: ‘What of your quest, and of your vow?’
But Beren said: ‘It is fulfilled. Even now a Silmaril is in my hand.’
Then Thingol said: ‘Show it to me!’
And Beren put forth his left hand, slowly opening its fingers; but it was empty.Then he held up his right arm; and from that hour he named himself Camlost, theEmpty-handed.
Then Thingol’s mood was softened; and Beren sat before his throne upon theleft, and Luthien upon the right, and they told all the tale of the Quest, while allthere listened and were filled with amazement. And it seemed to Thingol thatthis Man was unlike all other mortal Men, and among the great in Arda, and thelove of Luthien a thing new and strange; and he perceived that their doom mightnot be withstood by any power of the world. Therefore at the last he yielded hiswill, and Beren took the hand of Luthien before the throne of her father.
But now a shadow fell upon the joy of Doriath at the return of Luthien thefair; for learning of the cause of the madness of Carcharoth the people grew the
more afraid, perceiving that his danger was fraught with dreadful power becauseof the holy jewel, and hardly might be overthrown. And Beren, hearing of theonslaught of the Wolf, understood that the Quest was not yet fulfilled.
Therefore, since daily Carcharoth drew nearer to Menegroth, they preparedthe Hunting of the Wolf; of all pursuits of beasts whereof tales tell the mostperilous. To that chase went Huan the Hound of Valinor, and Mablung of theHeavy Hand, and Beleg Strongbow, and Beren Erchamion, and Thingol King ofDoriath. They rode forth in the morning and passed over the River Esgalduin;but Luthien remained behind at the gates of Menegroth. A dark shadow fell uponher and it seemed to her that the sun had sickened and turned black.
The hunters turned east and north, and following the course of the river theycame at last upon Carcharoth the Wolf in a dark valley, down the northern sidewhereof Esgalduin fell in a torrent over steep falls. At the foot of the fallsCarcharoth drank to ease his consuming thirst, and he howled, and thus theywere aware of him. But he, espying their approach, rushed not suddenly to attackthem. It may be that the devil’s cunning of his heart awoke, being for a momenteased of his pain by the sweet waters of Esgalduin; and even as they rodetowards him he slunk aside into a deep brake, and there lay hid. But they set aguard about all that place, and waited, and the shadows grew long in the forest.
Beren stood beside Thingol, and suddenly they were aware that Huan had lefttheir side. Then a great baying awoke in the thicket; for Huan becomingimpatient and desiring to look upon this wolf had gone in alone to dislodge him.But Carcharoth avoided him, and bursting from the thorns leaped suddenly uponThingol. Swiftly Beren strode before him with a spear, but Carcharoth swept itaside and felled him, biting at his breast. In that moment Huan leaped from thethicket upon the back of the Wolf, and they fell together fighting bitterly; and nobattle of wolf and hound has been like to it, for in the baying of Huan was heardthe voice of the horns of Orome and the wrath of the Valar, but in the howls ofCarcharoth was the hate of Morgoth and malice crueller than teeth of steel; andthe rocks were rent by their clamour and fell from on high and choked the fallsof Esgalduin. There they fought to the death; but Thingol gave no heed, for heknelt by Beren, seeing that he was sorely hurt.
Huan in that hour slew Carcharoth; but there in the woven woods of Doriathhis own doom long spoken was fulfilled, and he was wounded mortally, and thevenom of Morgoth entered into him. Then he came, and falling beside Berenspoke for the third time with words; and he bade Beren farewell before he died.Beren spoke not, but laid his hand upon the head of the hound, and so theyparted.
Mablung and Beleg came hastening to the King’s aid, but when they looked
upon what was done they cast aside their spears and wept. Then Mablung took aknife and ripped up the belly of the Wolf; and within he was wellnigh allconsumed as with a fire, but the hand of Beren that held the jewel was yetincorrupt. But when Mablung reached forth to touch it, the hand was no more,and the Silmaril lay there unveiled, and the light of it filled the shadows of theforest all about them. Then quickly and in fear Mablung took it and set it inBeren’s living hand; and Beren was aroused by the touch of the Silmaril, andheld it aloft, and bade Thingol receive it. ‘Now is the Quest achieved/ he said,‘and my doom full-wrought’; and he spoke no more.
They bore back Beren Camlost son of Barahir upon a bier of branches withHuan the wolfhound at his side; and night fell ere they returned to Menegroth.At the feet of Hirilorn the great beech Luthien met them walking slow, and somebore torches beside the bier. There she set her arms about Beren, and kissed him,bidding him await her beyond the Western Sea; and he looked upon her eyes erethe spirit left him. But the starlight was quenched and darkness had fallen evenupon Luthien Tinuviel. Thus ended the Quest of the Silmaril; but the Lay ofLeithian, Release from Bondage, does not end.
For the spirit of Beren at her bidding tarried in the halls of Mandos, unwillingto leave the world, until Luthien came to say her last farewell upon the dimshores of the Outer Sea, whence Men that die set out never to return. But thespirit of Luthien fell down into darkness, and at the last it fled, and her body laylike a flower that is suddenly cut off and lies for a while unwithered on the grass.
Then a winter, as it were the hoar age of mortal Men, fell upon Thingol. ButLuthien came to the halls of Mandos, where are the appointed places of theEldalie, beyond the mansions of the West upon the confines of the world. Therethose that wait sit in the shadow of their thought. But her beauty was more thantheir beauty, and her sorrow deeper than their sorrows; and she knelt beforeMandos and sang to him.
The song of Luthien before Mandos was the song most fair that ever in wordswas woven, and the song most sorrowful that ever the world shall hear.Unchanged, imperishable, it is sung still in Valinor beyond the hearing of theworld, and listening the Valar are grieved. For Luthien wove two themes ofwords, of the sorrow of the Eldar and the grief of Men, of the Two Kindreds thatwere made by Iluvatar to dwell in Arda, the Kingdom of Earth amid theinnumerable stars. And as she knelt before him her tears fell upon his feet likerain upon the stones; and Mandos was moved to pity, who never before was somoved, nor has been since.
Therefore he summoned Beren, and even as Luthien had spoken in the hour ofhis death they met again beyond the Western Sea. But Mandos had no power to
withhold the spirits of Men that were dead within the confines of the world, aftertheir time of waiting; nor could he change the fates of the Children of Iluvatar.He went therefore to Manwe, Lord of the Valar, who governed the world underthe hand of Iluvatar; and Manwe sought counsel in his inmost thought, where thewill of Iluvatar was revealed.
These were the choices that he gave to Luthien. Because of her labours andher sorrow, she should be released from Mandos, and go to Valimar, there todwell until the world’s end among the Valar, forgetting all griefs that her life hadknown. Thither Beren could not come. For it was not permitted to the Valar towithhold Death from him, which is the gift of Iluvatar to Men. But the otherchoice was this: that she might return to Middle-earth, and take with her Beren,there to dwell again, but without certitude of life or joy. Then she would becomemortal, and subject to a second death, even as he; and ere long she would leavethe world for ever, and her beauty become only a memory in song.
This doom she chose, forsaking the Blessed Realm, and putting aside all claimto kinship with those that dwell there; that thus whatever grief might lie in wait,the fates of Beren and Luthien might be joined, and their paths lead togetherbeyond the confines of the world. So it was that alone of the Eldalie she has diedindeed, and left the world long ago. Yet in her choice the Two Kindreds havebeen joined; and she is the forerunner of many in whom the Eldar see yet,though all the world is changed, the likeness of Luthien the beloved, whom theyhave lost.
CHAPTER 20
OF THE FIFTH BATTLE: NIRNAETH ARNQEDIAD
It is said that Beren and Luthien returned to the northern lands of Middle-earth,and dwelt together for a time as living man and woman; and they took up againtheir mortal form in Doriath. Those that saw them were both glad and fearful;and Luthien went to Menegroth and healed the winter of Thingol with the touchof her hand. But Melian looked in her eyes and read the doom that was writtenthere, and turned away; for she knew that a parting beyond the end of the worldhad come between them, and no grief of loss has been heavier than the grief ofMelian the Maia in that hour. Then Beren and Luthien went forth alone, fearingneither thirst nor hunger; and they passed beyond the River Gelion intoOssiriand, and dwelt there in Tol Galen the green isle, in the midst of Adurant,until all tidings of them ceased. The Eldar afterwards called that country DorFirn-i-Guinar, the Land of the Dead that Live; and there was born Dior Aranelthe beautiful, who was after known as Dior Eluchil, which is Thingol’s Heir. Nomortal man spoke ever again with Beren son of Barahir; and none saw Beren orLuthien leave the world, or marked where at last their bodies lay.
In those days Maedhros son of Feanor lifted up his heart, perceiving thatMorgoth was not unassailable; for the deeds of Beren and Luthien were sung inmany songs throughout Beleriand. Yet Morgoth would destroy them all, one byone, if they could not again unite, and make new league and common council;and he began those counsels for the raising of the fortunes of the Eldar that arecalled the Union of Maedhros.
Yet the oath of Feanor and the evil deeds that it had wrought did injury to thedesign of Maedhros, and he had less aid than should have been. Orodreth wouldnot march forth at the word of any son of Feanor, because of the deeds ofCelegorm and Curufin; and the Elves of Nargothrond trusted still to defend theirhidden stronghold by secrecy and stealth. Thence came only a small company,following Gwindor son of Guilin, a very valiant prince; and against the will ofOrodreth he went to the northern war, because he grieved for the loss of Gelmirhis brother in the Dagor Bragollach. They took the badge of the house ofFingolfin, and marched beneath the banners of Fingon; and they came neverback, save one.
From Doriath came little help. For Maedhros and his brothers, beingconstrained by their oath, had before sent to Thingol and reminded him withhaughty words of their claim, summoning him to yield the Silmaril, or become
their enemy. Melian counselled him to surrender it; but the words of the sons ofFeanor were proud and threatening, and Thin-gol was filled with anger, thinkingof the anguish of Liithien and the blood of Beren whereby the jewel had beenwon, despite the malice of Celegorm and Curufin. And every day that he lookedupon the Silmaril the more he desired to keep it for ever; for such was its power.Therefore he sent back the messengers with scornful words. Maedhros made noanswer, for he had now begun to devise the league and union of the Elves; butCelegorm and Curufin vowed openly to slay Thingol and destroy his people, ifthey came victorious from war, and the jewel were not surrendered of free will.Then Thingol fortified the marches of his realm, and went not to war, nor anyout of Doriath save Mablung and Beleg, who were unwilling to have no part inthese great deeds. To them Thingol gave leave to go, so long as they served notthe sons of Feanor; and they joined themselves to the host of Fingon.
But Maedhros had the help of the Naugrim, both in armed force and in greatstore of weapons; and the smithies of Nogrod and Belegost were busy in thosedays. And he gathered together again all his brothers and all the people whowould follow them; and the Men of Bor and Ulfang were marshalled and trainedfor war, and they summoned yet more of their kinsfolk out of the East. Moreoverin the west Fingon, ever the friend of Maedhros, took counsel with Himring, andin Hithlum the Noldor and the Men of the house of Hador prepared for war. Inthe forest of Brethil Halmir, lord of the People of Haleth, gathered his men, andthey whetted their axes; but Halmir died ere the war came, and Haldir his sonruled that people. And to Gondolin also the tidings came, to Turgon, the hiddenking.
But Maedhros made trial of his strength too soon, ere his plans were full-wrought; and though the Ores were driven out of all the northward regions ofBeleriand, and even Dorthonion was freed for a while, Morgoth was warned ofthe uprising of the Eldar and the Elf-friends, and took counsel against them.Many spies and workers of treason he sent forth among them, as he was thebetter able now to do, for the faithless Men of his secret allegiance were yet deepin the secrets of the sons of Feanor.
At length Maedhros, having gathered all the strength that he could of Elvesand Men and Dwarves, resolved to assault Angband from east and west; and hepurposed to march with banners displayed in open force over Anfauglith. Butwhen he had drawn forth, as he hoped, the armies of Morgoth in answer, thenFingon should issue forth from the passes of Hithlum; and thus they thought totake the might of Morgoth as between anvil and hammer, and break it to pieces.And the signal for this was to be the firing of a great beacon in Dorthonion.
On the appointed day, on the morning of Midsummer, the trumpets of the
Eldar greeted the rising of the sun; and in the east was raised the standard of thesons of Feanor, and in the west the standard of Fingon, High King of the Noldor.Then Fingon looked out from the walls of Eithel Sirion, and his host was arrayedin the valleys and the woods upon the east of Ered Wethrin, well hid from theeyes of the Enemy; but he knew that it was very great. For there all the Noldor ofHithlum were assembled, together with Elves of the Falas and Gwindor’scompany from Nargothrond, and he had great strength of Men: upon the rightwere the host of Dor-lomin and all the valour of Hurin and Huor his brother, andto them had come Haldir of Brethil with many men of the woods.
Then Fingon looked towards Thangorodrim, and there was a dark cloud aboutit, and a black smoke went up; and he knew that the wrath of Morgoth wasaroused, and that their challenge was accepted. A shadow of doubt fell uponFingon’s heart; and he looked eastwards, seeking if he might see with elven-sight the dust of Anfauglith rising beneath the hosts of Maedhros. He knew notthat Maedhros was hindered in his setting-forth by the guile of Uldor theaccursed, who deceived him with false warnings of assault from Angband.
But now a cry went up, passing up the wind from the south from vale to vale,and Elves and Men lifted their voices in wonder and joy. For unsummoned andunlooked for Turgon had opened the leaguer of Gondolin, and was come with anarmy ten thousand strong, with bright mail and long swords and spears like aforest. Then when Fingon heard afar the great trumpet of Turgon his brother, theshadow passed and his heart was uplifted, and he shouted aloud: ‘Utulie’n aure!Alya Eldalie ar Atanatari, utulie’n aure! The day has come! Behold, people ofthe Eldar and Fathers of Men, the day has come!’ And all those who heard hisgreat voice echo in the hills answered crying: ‘Auta i lome! The night ispassing!’
Now Morgoth, who knew much of what was done and designed by hisenemies, chose his hour, and trusting in his treacherous servants to hold backMaedhros and prevent the union of his foes he sent a force seeming great (andyet but part of all that he had made ready) towards Hithlum; and they were cladall in dun raiment and showed no naked steel, and thus were already far over thesands of Anfauglith before their approach was seen.
Then the hearts of the Noldor grew hot, and their captains wished to assailtheir foes upon the plain; but Hurin spoke against it, and bade them beware ofthe guile of Morgoth, whose strength was always greater than it seemed, and hispurpose other than he revealed. And though the signal of the approach ofMaedhros came not, and the host grew impatient, Hurin urged them still to awaitit, and to let the Ores break themselves in assault upon the hills.
But the Captain of Morgoth in the west had been commanded to draw out
Fingon swiftly from his hills by whatever means he could. He marched ontherefore until the front of his battle was drawn up before the stream of Sirion,from the walls of the fortress of Eithel Sirion to the inflowing of Rivil at the Fenof Serech; and the outposts of Fingon could see the eyes of their enemies. Butthere was no answer to his challenge, and the taunts of the Ores faltered as theylooked upon the silent walls and the hidden threat of the hills. Then the Captainof Morgoth sent out riders with tokens of parley, and they rode up before theoutworks of the Barad Eithel. With them they brought Gelmir son of Guilin, thatlord of Nargothrond whom they had captured in the Bragollach; and they hadblinded him. Then the heralds of Angband showed him forth, crying: ‘We havemany more such at home, but you must make haste if you would find them; forwe shall deal with them all when we return even so. 5 And they hewed offGelmir’s hands and feet, and his head last, within sight of the Elves, and lefthim.
By ill chance, at that place in the outworks stood Gwindor of Nargothrond, thebrother of Gelmir. Now his wrath was kindled to madness, and he leapt forth onhorseback, and many riders with him; and they pursued the heralds and slewthem, and drove on deep into the main host. And seeing this all the host of theNoldor was set on fire, and Fingon put on his white helm and sounded histrumpets, and all the host of Hithlum leapt forth from the hills in suddenonslaught. The light of the drawing of the swords of the Noldor was like a fire ina field of reeds; and so fell and swift was their onset that almost the designs ofMorgoth went astray. Before the army that he sent westward could bestrengthened it was swept away, and the banners of Fingon passed overAnfauglith and were raised before the walls of Angband. Ever in the forefront ofthat battle went Gwindor and the Elves of Nargothrond, and even now theycould not be restrained; and they burst through the Gate and slew the guardsupon the very stairs of Angband, and Morgoth trembled upon his deep throne,hearing them beat upon his doors. But they were trapped there, and all were slainsave Gwindor only, whom they took alive; for Fingon could not come to theiraid. By many secret doors in Thangorodrim Morgoth had let issue forth his mainhost that he held in waiting, and Fingon was beaten back with great loss from thewalls.
Then in the plain of Anfauglith, on the fourth day of the war, there beganNirnaeth Arnoediad, Unnumbered Tears, for no song or tale can contain all itsgrief. The host of Fingon retreated over the sands, and Haldir lord of the Haladinwas slain in the rearguard; with him fell most of the Men of Brethil, and camenever back to their woods. But on the fifth day as night fell, and they were stillfar from Ered Wethrin, the Ores surrounded the host of Hithlum, and they fought
until day, pressed ever closer. In the morning came hope, when the horns ofTurgon were heard as he marched up with the main host of Gondolin; for theyhad been stationed southward guarding the Pass of Sirion, and Turgon restrainedmost of his people from the rash onslaught. Now he hastened to the aid of hisbrother; and the Gondolindrim were strong and clad in mail, and their ranksshone like a river of steel in the sun.
Now the phalanx of the guard of the King broke through the ranks of the Ores,and Turgon hewed his way to the side of his brother; and it is told that themeeting of Turgon with Hurin, who stood beside Fingon, was glad in the midstof battle. Then hope was renewed in the hearts of the Elves; and in that verytime, at the third hour of morning, the trumpets of Maedhros were heard at lastcoming up from the east, and the banners of the sons of Feanor assailed theenemy in the rear. Some have said that even then the Eldar might have won theday, had all their hosts proved faithful; for the Ores wavered, and their onslaughtwas stayed, and already some were turning to flight. But even as the vanguard ofMaedhros came upon the Ores, Morgoth loosed his last strength, and Angbandwas emptied. There came wolves, and wolfriders, and there came Balrogs, anddragons, and Glaurung father of dragons. The strength and terror of the GreatWorm were now great indeed, and Elves and Men withered before him; and hecame between the hosts of Maedhros and Fingon and swept them apart.
Yet neither by wolf, nor by Balrog, nor by Dragon, would Morgoth haveachieved his end, but for the treachery of Men. In this hour the plots of Ulfangwere revealed. Many of the Easterlings turned and fled, their hearts being filledwith lies and fear; but the sons of Ulfang went over suddenly to Morgoth anddrove in upon the rear of the sons of Feanor, and in the confusion that theywrought they came near to the standard of Maedhros. They reaped not thereward that Morgoth promised them, for Maglor slew Uldor the accursed, theleader in treason, and the sons of Bor slew Ulfast and Ulwarth ere theythemselves were slain. But new strength of evil Men came up that Uldor hadsummoned and kept hidden in the eastern hills, and the host of Maedhros wasassailed now on three sides, and it broke, and was scattered, and fled this wayand that. Yet fate saved the sons of Feanor, and though all were wounded nonewere slain, for they drew together, and gathering a remnant of the Noldor and theNaugrim about them they hewed a way out of the battle and escaped far awaytowards Mount Dolmed in the east.
Last of all the eastern force to stand firm were the Dwarves of Belegost, andthus they won renown. For the Naugrim withstood fire more hardily than eitherElves or Men, and it was their custom moreover to wear great masks in battlehideous to look upon; and those stood them in good stead against the dragons.
And but for them Glaurung and his brood would have withered all that was leftof the Noldor. But the Naugrim made a circle about him when he assailed them,and even his mighty armour was not full proof against the blows of their greataxes; and when in his rage Glaurung turned and struck down Azaghal, Lord ofBelegost, and crawled over him, with his last stroke Azaghal drove a knife intohis belly, and so wounded him that he fled the field, and the beasts of Angbandin dismay followed after him. Then the Dwarves raised up the body of Azaghaland bore it away; and with slow steps they walked behind singing a dirge in deepvoices, as it were a funeral pomp in their country, and gave no heed more to theirfoes; and none dared to stay them.
But now in the western battle Fingon and Turgon were assailed by a tide offoes thrice greater than all the force that was left to them. Gothmog, Lord ofBalrogs, high-captain of Angband, was come; and he drove a dark wedgebetween the Elvenhosts, surrounding King Fingon, and thrusting Turgon andHurin aside towards the Fen of Serech. Then he turned upon Fingon. That was agrim meeting. At last Fingon stood alone with his guard dead about him; and hefought with Gothmog, until another Balrog came behind and cast a thong of fireabout him. Then Gothmog hewed him with his black axe, and a white flamesprang up from the helm of Fingon as it was cloven. Thus fell the High King ofthe Noldor; and they beat him into the dust with their maces, and his banner,blue and silver, they trod into the mire of his blood.
The field was lost; but still Hurin and Huor and the remnant of the house ofHaldor stood firm with Turgon of Gondolin, and the hosts of Morgoth could notyet win the Pass of Sirion. Then Hurin spoke to Turgon, saying: ‘Go now, lord,while time is! For in you lives the last hope of the Eldar, and while Gondolinstands Morgoth shall still know fear in his heart.’
But Turgon answered: ‘Not long now can Gondolin be hidden; and beingdiscovered it must fall.’
Then Huor spoke and said: ‘Yet if it stands but a little while, then out of yourhouse shall come the hope of Elves and Men. This I say to you, lord, with theeyes of death: though we part here for ever, and I shall not look on your whitewalls again, from you and from me a new star shall arise. Farewell! ’
And Maeglin, Turgon’s sister-son, who stood by, heard these words, and didnot forget them; but he said nothing.
Then Turgon took the counsel of Hurin and Huor, and summoning all thatremained of the host of Gondolin and such of Fingon’s people as could begathered he retreated towards the Pass of Sirion; and his captains Ecthelion andGlorfindel guarded the flanks to right and left, so that none of the enemy shouldpass them by. But the Men of Dor-lomin held the rearguard, as Hurin and Huor
desired; for they did not wish in their hearts to leave the Northlands, and if theycould not win back to their homes, there they would stand to the end. Thus wasthe treachery of Uldor redressed; and of all the deeds of war that the fathers ofMen wrought in behalf of the Eldar, the last stand of the Men of Dor-lomin ismost renowned.
So it was that Turgon fought his way southward, until coming behind theguard of Hurin and Huor he passed down Sirion and escaped; and he vanishedinto the mountains and was hidden from the eyes of Morgoth. But the brothersdrew the remnant of the Men of the house of Hador about them, and foot by footthey withdrew, until they came behind the Fen of Serech, and had the stream ofRivil before them. There they stood and gave way no more.
Then all the hosts of Angband swarmed against them, and they bridged thestream with their dead, and encircled the remnant of Hithlum as a gathering tideabout a rock. There as the sun westered on the sixth day, and the shadow of EredWethrin grew dark, Huor fell pierced with a venomed arrow in his eye, and allthe valiant Men of Hador were slain about him in a heap; and the Ores hewedtheir heads and piled them as a mound of gold in the sunset.
Last of all Hurin stood alone. Then he cast aside his shield, and wielded anaxe two-handed; and it is sung that the axe smoked in the black blood of thetroll-guard of Gothmog until it withered, and each time that he slew Hurin cried:‘Aure entuluva! Day shall come again!’ Seventy times he uttered that cry; butthey took him at last alive, by the command of Morgoth, for the Ores grappledhim with their hands, which clung to him still though he hewed off their arms;and ever their numbers were renewed, until at last he fell buried beneath them.Then Gothmog bound him and dragged him to Angband with mockery.
Thus ended Nirnaeth Arnoediad, as the sun went down beyond the sea. Nightfell in Hithlum, and there came a great storm of wind out of the West.
Great was the triumph of Morgoth, and his design was accomplished in amanner after his own heart; for Men took the lives of Men, and betrayed theEldar, and fear and hatred were aroused among those that should have beenunited against him. From that day the hearts of the Elves were estranged fromMen, save only those of the Three Houses of the Edain.
The realm of Fingon was no more; and the sons of Feanor wandered as leavesbefore the wind. Their arms were scattered, and their league broken; and theytook to a wild and woodland life beneath the feet of Ered Lindon, mingling withthe Green-elves of Ossiriand, bereft of their power and glory of old. In Brethilsome few of the Haladin yet dwelt in the protection of their woods, and Handir
son of Haldir was their lord; but to Hithlum came back never one of Fingon’shost, nor any of the Men of Hador’s house, nor any tidings of the battle and thefate of their lords. But Morgoth sent thither the Easterlings that had served him,denying them the rich lands of Beleriand which they coveted; and he shut themin Hithlum and forbade them to leave it. Such was the reward he gave them fortheir treachery to Maedhros: to plunder and harass the old and the women andthe children of Hador’s people. The remnant of the Eldar of Hithlum were takento the mines of the north and laboured there as thralls, save some that eluded himand escaped into the wilds and the mountains.
The Ores and the wolves went freely through all the North, and came everfurther southward into Beleriand, even as far as Nan-tathren, the Land ofWillows, and the borders of Ossiriand, and none were safe in field or wild.Doriath indeed remained, and the halls of Nargothrond were hidden; butMorgoth gave small heed to them, either because he knew little of them, orbecause their hour was not yet come in the deep purposes of his malice. Manynow fled to the Havens and took refuge behind Cirdan’s walls, and the marinerspassed up and down the coast and harried the enemy with swift landings. But inthe next year, ere the winter was come, Morgoth sent great strength overHithlum and Nevrast, and they came down the rivers Brithon and Nenning andravaged all the Falas, and besieged the walls of Brithombar and Eglarest. Smithsand miners and masters of fire they brought with them, and they set up greatengines; and valiantly though they were resisted they broke the walls at last.Then the Havens were laid in ruin, and the tower of Barad Nimras cast down;and the most part of Cirdan’s people were slain or enslaved. But some wentaboard ship and escaped by sea; and among them was Ereinion Gil-galad, theson of Fingon, whom his father had sent to the Havens after the DagorBragollach. This remnant sailed with Cirdan south to the Isle of Balar, and theymade a refuge for all that could come thither; for they kept a foothold also at theMouths of Sirion, and there many light and swift ships lay hid in the creeks andwaters where the reeds were dense as a forest.
And when Turgon heard of this he sent again his messengers to Sirion’smouths, and besought the aid of Cirdan the Shipwright. At the bidding of TurgonCirdan built seven swift ships, and they sailed out into the West; but no tidingsof them came ever back to Balar, save of one, and the last. The mariners of thatship toiled long in the sea, and returning at last in despair they foundered in agreat storm within sight of the coasts of Middle-earth; but one of them was savedby Ulmo from the wrath of Osse, and the waves bore him up, and cast himashore in Nevrast. His name was Voronwe; and he was one of those that Turgonsent forth as messengers from Gondolin.
Now the thought of Morgoth dwelt ever upon Turgon; for Turgon had escapedhim, of all his foes that one whom he most desired to take or to destroy. And thatthought troubled him, and marred his victory, for Turgon of the mighty house ofFingolfin was now by right King of all the Noldor; and Morgoth feared andhated the house of Fingolfin, because they had the friendship of Ulmo his foe,and because of the wounds that Fingolfin gave him with his sword. And most ofall his kin Morgoth feared Turgon; for of old in Valinor his eye had lighted uponhim, and whenever he drew near a shadow had fallen on his spirit, forebodingthat in some time that yet lay hidden, from Turgon ruin should come to him.
Therefore Hurin was brought before Morgoth, for Morgoth knew that he hadthe friendship of the King of Gondolin; but Hurin defied him, and mocked him.Then Morgoth cursed Hurin and Morwen and their offspring, and set a doomupon them of darkness and sorrow; and taking Hurin from prison he set him in achair of stone upon a high place of Thangorodrim. There he was bound by thepower of Morgoth, and Morgoth standing beside him cursed him again; and hesaid: 'Sit now there; and look out upon the lands where evil and despair shallcome upon those whom thou lovest. Thou hast dared to mock me, and toquestion the power of Melkor, Master of the fates of Arda. Therefore with myeyes thou shalt see, and with my ears thou shalt hear; and never shalt thou movefrom this place until all is fulfilled unto its bitter end.’
And even so it came to pass; but it is not said that Hurin asked ever ofMorgoth either mercy or death, for himself or for any of his kin.
By the command of Morgoth the Ores with great labour gathered all thebodies of those who had fallen in the great battle, and all their harness andweapons, and piled them in a great mound in the midst of Anfauglith; and it waslike a hill that could be seen from afar. Haudh-en-Ndengin the Elves named it,the Hill of Slain, and Haudh-en-Nirnaeth, the Hill of Tears. But grass came thereand grew again long and green upon that hill, alone in all the desert that Morgothmade; and no creature of Morgoth trod thereafter upon the earth beneath whichthe swords of the Eldar and the Edain crumbled into rust.
CHAPTER 21
OF TURIN TURAMBAR
Rian, daughter of Belegund, was the wife of Huor, son of Galdor; and she waswedded to him two months before he went with Hurin his brother to the NirnaethArnoediad. When no tidings came of her lord she fled into the wild; but she wasaided by the Grey-elves of Mithrim, and when her son Tuor was born theyfostered him. Then Rian departed from Hithlum, and going to the Haudh-en-Ndengin she laid herself down upon it and died.
Morwen, daughter of Baragund, was the wife of Hurin, Lord of Dor-lomin;and their son was Turin, who was born in the year that Beren Erchamion cameupon Luthien in the Forest of Neldoreth. A daughter they had also who wascalled Lalaith, which is Laughter, and she was beloved by Turin her brother; butwhen she was three years old there came a pestilence to Hithlum, borne on anevil wind out of Angband, and she died.
Now after the Nirnaeth Arnoediad Morwen abode still in Dor-lomin, for Turinwas but eight years old, and she was again with child. Those days were evil; forthe Easterlings that came into Hithlum despised the remnant of the people ofHador, and they oppressed them, and took their lands and their goods, andenslaved their children. But so great was the beauty and majesty of the Lady ofDor-lomin that the Easterlings were afraid, and dared not to lay hands upon heror her household; and they whispered among themselves, saying that she wasperilous, and a witch skilled in magic and in league with the Elves. Yet she wasnow poor and without aid, save that she was succoured secretly by a kinswomanof Hurin named Aerin, whom Brodda, an Easterling, had taken as his wife; andMorwen feared greatly that Turin would be taken from her and enslaved.Therefore it came into her heart to send him away in secret, and to beg KingThingol to harbour him, for Beren son of Barahir was her father’s kinsman, andhe had been moreover a friend of Hurin, ere evil befell. Therefore in the autumnof the Year of Lamentation Morwen sent Turin forth over the mountains withtwo aged servants, bidding them find entry, if they could, into the kingdom ofDoriath. Thus was the fate of Turin woven, which is fulltold in that lay that iscalled Nam i Hm Hurin, the Tale of the Children of Hurin, and is the longest ofall the lays that speak of those days. Here that tale is told in brief, for it is wovenwith the fate of the Silmarils and of the Elves; and it is called the Tale of Grief,for it is sorrowful, and in it are revealed most evil works of Morgoth Bauglir.
In the first beginning of the year Morwen gave birth to her child, the daughterof Hurin; and she named her Nienor, which is Mourning. But Turin and hiscompanions passing through great perils came at last to the borders of Doriath;
and there they were found by Beleg Strongbow, chief of the marchwardens ofKing Thingol, who led them to Menegroth. Then Thingol received Turin, andtook him even to his own fostering, in honour of Hurin the Steadfast; forThingol’s mood was changed towards the houses of the Elf-friends. Thereaftermessengers went north to Hithlum, bidding Morwen leave Dor-lomin and returnwith them to Doriath; but still she would not leave the house in which she haddwelt with Hurin. And when the Elves departed she sent with them the Dragon-helm of Dor-lomin, greatest of the heirlooms of the house of Hador.
Turin grew fair and strong in Doriath, but he was marked with sorrow. Fornine years he dwelt in Thingol’s halls, and during that time his grief grew less;for messengers went at times to Hithlum, and returning they brought bettertidings of Morwen and Nienor. But there came a day when the messengers didnot return out of the north, and Thingol would send no more. Then Turin wasfilled with fear for his mother and his sister, and in grimness of heart he wentbefore the King and asked for mail and sword; and he put on the Dragon-helm ofDor-lomin and went out to battle on the marches of Doriath, and became thecompanion in arms of Beleg Cuthalion.
And when three years had passed, Turin returned again to Menegroth; but hecame from the wild, and was unkempt, and his gear and garments werewayworn. Now one there was in Doriath, of the people of the Nandor, high in thecounsels of the King; Saeros was his name. He had long begrudged to Turin thehonour he received as Thingol’s fosterson; and seated opposite to him at theboard he taunted him, saying: ‘If the Men of Hithlum are so wild and fell, ofwhat sort are the women of that land? Do they run like deer clad only in theirhair?’ Then Turin in great anger took up a drinking-vessel, and cast it at Saeros;and he was grievously hurt.
On the next day Saeros waylaid Turin as he set out from Menegroth to returnto the marches; but Turin overcame him, and set him to run naked as a huntedbeast through the woods. Then Saeros fleeing in terror before him fell into thechasm of a stream, and his body was broken on a great rock in the water. Butothers coming saw what was done, and Mablung was among them; and he badeTurin return with him to Menegroth and abide the judgement of the King,seeking his pardon. But Turin, deeming himself now an outlaw and fearing to beheld captive, refused Mablung’s bidding, and turned swiftly away; and passingthrough the Girdle of Melian he came into the woods west of Sirion. There hejoined himself to a band of such houseless and desperate men as could be foundin those evil days lurking in the wild; and their hands were turned against allwho came in their path, Elves and Men and Ores.
But when all that had befallen was told and searched out before Thingol, the
King pardoned Turin, holding him wronged. In that time Beleg Strongbowreturned from the north marches and came to Menegroth, seeking him; andThingol spoke to Beleg, saying: T grieve, Cuthalion; for I took Hurin’s son asmy son, and so he shall remain, unless Hurin himself should return out of theshadows to claim his own. I would not have any say that Turin was driven forthunjustly into the wild, and gladly would I welcome him back; for I loved himwell.’
And Beleg answered: ‘I will seek Turin until I find him, and I will bring himback to Menegroth, if I can; for I love him also.’
Then Beleg departed from Menegroth, and far across Beleriand he sought invain for tidings of Turin through many perils.
But Turin abode long among the outlaws, and became their captain; and henamed himself Neithan, the Wronged. Very warily they dwelt in the woodedlands south of Teiglin; but when a year had passed since Turin fled from Doriath,Beleg came upon their lair by night. It chanced that at that time Turin was gonefrom the camp; and the outlaws seized Beleg and bound him, and treated himcruelly, for they feared him as a spy of the King of Doriath. But Turin returningand seeing what was done, was stricken with remorse for all their evil andlawless deeds; and he released Beleg, and they renewed their friendship, andTurin foreswore thenceforward war or plunder against all save the servants ofAngband.
Then Beleg told Turin of King Thingol’s pardon; and he sought to persuadehim by all means that he might to return with him to Doriath, saying that therewas great need of his strength and valour on the north marches of the realm. 'Oflate the Ores have found a way down out of Taur-nu-Fuin,’ he said; They havemade a road through the Pass of Anach.’
‘I do not remember it,’ said Turin.
‘Never did we go so far from the borders,’ said Beleg. ‘But you have seen thepeaks of the Crissaegrim far off, and to the east the dark walls of the Gorgoroth.Anach lies between, above the high springs of Mindeb, a hard and dangerousroad; yet many come by it now, and Dimbar which used to be in peace is fallingunder the Black Hand, and the Men of Brethil are troubled. We are neededthere.’
But in the pride of his heart Turin refused the pardon of the King, and thewords of Beleg were of no avail to change his mood. And he for his part urgedBeleg to remain with him in the lands west of Sirion; but that Beleg would notdo, and he said: ‘Hard you are, Turin, and stubborn. Now the turn is mine. If youwish indeed to have the Strongbow beside you, look for me in Dimbar; forthither I shall return.’
On the next day Beleg set out, and Turin went with him a bowshot from thecamp; but he said nothing. ‘Is it farewell, then, son of Hurin ? 5 said Beleg. ThenTurin looked out westward, and he saw far off the great height of Amon Rudh;and unwitting of what lay before him he answered: ‘You have said, seek me inDimbar. But I say, seek for me on Amon Rudh! Else, this is our last farewell.’Then they parted, in friendship, yet in sadness.
Now Beleg returned to the Thousand Caves, and coming before Thingol andMelian he told them of all that had befallen, save only of his evil handling byTurin’s companions. Then Thingol sighed, and he said: ‘What more would Turinhave me do?’
‘Give me leave, lord,’ said Beleg, ‘and I will guard him and guide him as Imay; then no man shall say that elven-words are lightly spoken. Nor would Iwish to see so great a good run to nothing in the wild.’
Then Thingol gave Beleg leave to do as he would; and he said: ‘BelegCuthalion! For many deeds you have earned my thanks; but not the least is thefinding of my fosterson. At this parting ask for any gift, and I will not deny it toyou.’
‘I ask then for a sword of worth,’ said Beleg; ‘for the Ores come now too thickand close for a bow only, and such blade as I have is no match for their armour.’
‘Choose from all that I have,’ said Thingol, ‘save only Aranruth, my own.’
Then Beleg chose Anglachel; and that was a sword of great worth, and it wasso named because it was made of iron that fell from heaven as a blazing star; itwould cleave all earth-delved iron. One other sword only in Middle-earth waslike to it. That sword does not enter into this tale, though it was made of thesame ore by the same smith; and that smith was Eol the Dark Elf, who tookAredhel Turgon’s sister to wife. He gave Anglachel to Thingol as fee, which hebegrudged, for leave to dwell in Nan Elmoth; but its mate Anguirel he kept, untilit was stolen from him by Maeglin, his son.
But as Thingol turned the hilt of Anglachel towards Beleg, Melian looked atthe blade; and she said: ‘There is malice in this sword. The dark heart of thesmith still dwells in it. It will not love the hand it serves; neither will it abidewith you long.’
‘Nonetheless I will wield it while I may,’ said Beleg.
‘Another gift I will give to you, Cuthalion,’ said Melian, ‘that shall be yourhelp in the wild, and the help also of those whom you choose.’ And she gave himstore of lembas, the waybread of the Elves, wrapped in leaves of silver, and thethreads that bound it were sealed at the knots with the seal of the Queen, a waferof white wax shaped as a single flower of Telperion; for according to thecustoms of the Eldalie the keeping and giving of lembas belonged to the Queenalone. In nothing did Melian show greater favour to Turin than in this gift; forthe Eldar had never before allowed Men to use this waybread, and seldom did soagain.
Then Beleg departed with these gifts from Menegroth and went back to thenorth marches, where he had his lodges, and many friends. Then in Dimbar theOres were driven back, and Anglachel rejoiced to be unsheathed; but when thewinter came, and war was stilled, suddenly his companions missed Beleg, and hereturned to them no more.
Now when Beleg parted from the outlaws and returned into Doriath, Turin ledthem away westward out of Sirion’s vale; for they grew weary of their lifewithout rest, ever watchful and in fear of pursuit, and they sought for a safer lair.And it chanced at a time of evening that they came upon three Dwarves, whofled before them; but one that lagged behind was seized and thrown down, and aman of the company took his bow and let fly an arrow at the others as theyvanished in the dusk. Now the dwarf that they had taken was named Mim; andhe pleaded for his life before Turin, and offered as ransom to lead them to hishidden halls which none might find without his aid. Then Turin pitied Mim, andspared him; and he said: ‘Where is your house?’
Then Mim answered: ‘High above the lands lies the house of Mim, upon thegreat hill; Amon Rudh is that hill called now, since the Elves changed all thenames.’
Then Turin was silent, and he looked long upon the dwarf; and at last he said:‘You shall bring us to that place.’
On the next day they set out thither, following Mim to Amon Rudh. Now thathill stood upon the edge of the moor-lands that rose between the vales of Sirionand Narog, and high above the stony heath it reared its crown; but its steep greyhead was bare, save for the red seregon that mantled the stone. And as the menof Turin’s band drew near, the sun westering broke through the clouds, and fellupon the crown; and the seregon was all in flower. Then one among them said:‘There is blood on the hill-top.’
But Mim led them by secret paths up the steep slopes of Amon Rudh; and atthe mouth of his cave he bowed to Turin, saying: ‘Enter into Bar-en-Danwedh,the House of Ransom; for so it shall be called.’
And now there came another dwarf bearing light to greet him, and they spoketogether, and passed swiftly down into the darkness of the cave; but Turinfollowed after, and came at length to a chamber far within, lit by dim lampshanging upon chains. There he found Mim kneeling at a stone couch beside thewall, and he tore his beard, and wailed, crying one name unceasingly; and on thecouch there lay a third. But Turin entering stood beside Mim, and offered himaid. Then Mim looked up at him, and said: ‘You can give no aid. For this isKhim, my son; and he is dead, pierced by an arrow. He died at sunset. Ibun myson has told me.’
Then pity rose in Turin’s heart, and he said to Mim: ‘Alas! I would recall thatshaft, if I could. Now Bar-en-Danwedh this house shall be called in truth; and ifever I come to any wealth, I will pay you a ransom of gold for your son, in tokenof sorrow, though it gladden your heart no more.’
Then Mim rose, and looked long at Turin. ‘I hear you,’ he said. ‘You speaklike a dwarf-lord of old; and at that I marvel. Now my heart is cooled, though itis not glad; and in this house you may dwell, if you will; for I will pay myransom.’
So began the abiding of Turin in the hidden house of Mim upon Amon Rudh;and he walked on the greensward before the mouth of the cave, and looked outeast, and west, and north. Northward he looked, and descried the forest ofBrethil climbing green about Amon Obel in its midst, and thither his eyes weredrawn ever and again, he knew not why; for his heart was set rather to the north¬west, where league upon league away on the skirts of the sky it seemed to himthat he could glimpse the Mountains of Shadow, the walls of his home. But atevening Turin looked west into the sunset, as the sun rode down red into thehazes above the distant coasts, and the Vale of Narog lay deep in the shadowsbetween.
In the time that followed Turin spoke much with Mim, and sitting with himalone he listened to his lore and the tale of his life. For Mim came of Dwarvesthat were banished in ancient days from the great Dwarf-cities of the east, andlong before the return of Morgoth they wandered westward into Beleriand; butthey became diminished in stature and in smith-craft, and they took to lives ofstealth, walking with bowed shoulders and furtive steps. Before the Dwarves ofNogrod and Belegost came west over the mountains the Elves of Beleriand knewnot what these others were, and they hunted them, and slew them; but afterwardsthey let them alone, and they were called Noegyth Nibin, the Petty-Dwarves, inthe Sindarin tongue. They loved none but themselves, and if they feared andhated the Ores, they hated the Eldar no less, and the Exiles most of all; for theNoldor, they said, had stolen their lands and their homes. Long ere King FinrodFelagund came over the Sea, the caves of Nargothrond were discovered by them,and by them its delving was begun; and beneath the crown of Amon Rudh, theBald Hill, the slow hands of the Petty-Dwarves had bored and deepened thecaves through the long years that they dwelt there, untroubled by the Grey-elvesof the woods. But now at last they had dwindled and died out of Middle-earth,all save Mim and his two sons; and Mim was old even in the reckoning ofDwarves, old and forgotten. And in his halls the smithies were idle, and the axesmsted, and their name was remembered only in ancient tales of Doriath andNargothrond.
But when the year drew on to midwinter, snow came down from the northheavier than they had known it in the river-vales, and Amon Rudh was covereddeep; and they said that the winters worsened in Beleriand as the power ofAngband grew. Then only the hardiest dared stir abroad; and some fell sick, andall were pinched with hunger. But in the dim dusk of a winter’s day thereappeared suddenly among them a man, as it seemed, of great bulk and girth,cloaked and hooded in white; and he walked up to the fire without a word. Andwhen men sprang up in fear, he laughed, and threw back his hood, and beneathhis wide cloak he bore a great pack; and in the light of the fire Turin lookedagain on the face of Beleg Cuthalion.
Thus Beleg returned once more to Turin, and their meeting was glad; and withhim he brought out of Dimbar the Dragon-helm of Dor-lomin, thinking that itmight lift Turin’s thought again above his life in the wilderness as the leader of apetty company. But still Turin would not return to Doriath; and Beleg yielding tohis love against his wisdom remained with him, and did not depart, and in thattime he laboured much for the good of Turin’s company. Those that were hurt orsick he tended, and gave to them the lembas of Melian; and they were quicklyhealed, for though the Grey-elves were less in skill and knowledge than theExiles from Valinor, in the ways of the life of Middle-earth they had a wisdombeyond the reach of Men. And because Beleg was strong and enduring,farsighted in mind as in eye, he came to be held in honour among the outlaws;but the hatred of Mim for the Elf that had come into Bar-en-Danwedh grew evergreater, and he sat with Ibun his son in the deepest shadows of his house,speaking to none. But Turin paid now little heed to the Dwarf; and when winterpassed, and spring came, they had sterner work to do.
Who knows now the counsels of Morgoth? Who can measure the reach of histhought, who had been Melkor, mighty among the Ainur of the Great Song, andsat now, a dark lord upon a dark throne in the North, weighing in his malice allthe tidings that came to him, and perceiving more of the deeds and purposes ofhis enemies than even the wisest of them feared, save only Melian the Queen?To her often the thought of Morgoth reached out, and there was foiled.
And now again the might of Angband was moved; and as the long fingers of agroping hand the forerunners of his armies probed the ways into Beleriand.Through Anach they came, and Dimbar was taken, and all the north marches ofDoriath. Down the ancient road they came that led through the long defile ofSirion, past the isle where Minas Tirith of Finrod had stood, and so through theland between Malduin and Sirion, and on through the eaves of Brethil to the
Crossings of Teiglin. Thence the road went on into the Guarded Plain; but theOres did not go far upon it, as yet, for there dwelt now in the wild a terror thatwas hidden, and upon the red hill were watchful eyes of which they had not beenwarned. For Turin put on again the Helm of Hador; and far and wide inBeleriand the whisper went, under wood and over stream and through the passesof the hills, saying that the Helm and Bow that had fallen in Dimbar had arisenagain beyond hope. Then many who went leaderless, dispossessed butundaunted, took heart again, and came to seek the Two Captains. Dor-Cuarthol,the Land of Bow and Helm, was in that time named all the region betweenTeiglin and the west march of Doriath; and Turin named himself anew, Gorthol,the Dread Helm, and his heart was high again. In Menegroth, and in the deephalls of Nargothrond, and even in the hidden realm of Gondolin, the fame of thedeeds of the Two Captains was heard; and in Angband also they were known.Then Morgoth laughed, for now by the Dragon-helm was Hurin’s son revealed tohim again; and ere long Amon Rudh was ringed with spies.
In the waning of the year Mim the Dwarf and Ibun his son went out from Bar-en-Danwedh to gather roots in the wild for their winter store; and they weretaken captive by Ores. Then for a second time Mim promised to guide hisenemies by the secret paths to his home on Amon Rudh; but yet he sought todelay the fulfilment of his promise, and demanded that Gorthol should not beslain. Then the Orc-captain laughed, and he said to Mim: ‘Assuredly Turin sonof Hurin shall not be slain.’
Thus was Bar-en-Danwedh betrayed, for the Ores came upon it by night atunawares, guided by Mim. There many of Turin’s company were slain as theyslept; but some fleeing by an inner stair came out upon the hill-top, and therethey fought until they fell, and their blood flowed out upon the seregon thatmantled the stone. But a net was cast over Turin as he fought, and he wasenmeshed in it, and overcome, and led away.
And at length when all was silent again Mim crept out of the shadows of hishouse; and as the sun rose over the mists of Sirion he stood beside the dead menon the hill-top. But he perceived that not all those that lay there were dead; forby one his gaze was returned, and he looked in the eyes of Beleg the Elf. Thenwith hatred long-stored Mim stepped up to Beleg, and drew forth the swordAnglachel that lay beneath the body of one that had fallen beside him; but Belegstumbling up seized back the sword and thrust it at the Dwarf, and Mim in terrorfled wailing from the hill-top. And Beleg cried after him: ‘The vengeance of thehouse of Hador will find you yet! ’
Now Beleg was sorely wounded, but he was mighty among the Elves ofMiddle-earth, and he was moreover a master of healing. Therefore he did not
die, and slowly his strength returned; and he sought in vain among the dead forTurin, to bury him. But he found him not; and then he knew that Hurin’s son wasyet alive, and taken to Angband.
With little hope Beleg departed from Amon Rudh and set out northward,towards the Crossings of Teiglin, following in the track of the Ores; and hecrossed over the Brithiach and journeyed through Dimbar towards the Pass ofAnach. And now he was not far behind them, for he went without sleeping,whereas they had tarried on their road, hunting in the lands and fearing nopursuit as they came northward; and not even in the dreadful woods of Taur-nu-Fuin did he swerve from the trail, for the skill of Beleg was greater than any thathave been in Middle-earth. But as he passed by night through that evil land hecame upon one lying asleep at the foot of a great dead tree; and Beleg staying hissteps beside the sleeper saw that it was an Elf. Then he spoke to him, and gavehim lembas, and asked him what fate had brought him to that terrible place; andhe named himself Gwindor, son of Guilin.
Grieving Beleg looked upon him; for Gwindor was now but a bent and fearfulshadow of his former shape and mood, when in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad that lordof Nargothrond rode with rash courage to the very doors of Angband, and therewas taken. For few of the Noldor whom Morgoth captured were put to death,because of their skill in forging and in mining for metals and gems; and Gwindorwas not slain, but put to labour in the mines of the North. By secret tunnelsknown only to themselves the mining Elves might sometimes escape; and thus itcame to pass that Beleg found him, spent and bewildered in the mazes of Taur-nu-Fuin.
And Gwindor told him that as he lay and lurked among the trees he saw agreat company of Ores passing northwards, and wolves went with them; andamong them was a Man, whose hands were chained, and they drove him onwardwith whips. ‘Very tall he was,’ said Gwindor, ‘as tall as are the Men from themisty hills of Hithlum/ Then Beleg told him of his own errand in Taur-nu-Fuin;and Gwindor sought to dissuade him from his quest, saying that he would butjoin Turin in the anguish that awaited him. But Beleg would not abandon Turin,and despairing himself he aroused hope again in Gwindor’s heart; and togetherthey went on, following the Ores until they came out of the forest on the highslopes that ran down to the barren dunes of Anfauglith. There within sight of thepeaks of Thangorodrim the Ores made their encampment in a bare dell as thelight of day was failing, and setting wolf-sentinels all about they fell tocarousing. A great storm rode up out of the west, and lightning glittered on theShadowy Mountains far away, as Beleg and Gwindor crept towards the dell.
When all in the camp were sleeping Beleg took his bow, and in the darkness
shot the wolf-sentinels, one by one and silently. Then in great peril they enteredin, and they found Turin fettered hand and foot and tied to a withered tree; andall about him knives that had been cast at him were embedded in the trunk, andhe was senseless in a sleep of great weariness. But Beleg and Gwindor cut thebonds that held him, and lifting him they carried him out of the dell; yet theycould bear him no further than to a thicket of thorn-trees a little way above.There they laid him down; and now the storm drew very near. Beleg drew hissword Anglachel, and with it he cut the fetters that bound Turin; but fate wasthat day more strong, for the blade slipped as he cut the shackles, and Turin’sfoot was pricked. Then he was aroused into a sudden wakefulness of rage andfear, and seeing one bending over him with naked blade he leapt up with a greatcry, believing that Ores were come again to torment him; and grappling with himin the darkness he seized Anglachel, and slew Beleg Cuthalion thinking him afoe.
But as he stood, finding himself free, and ready to sell his life dearly againstimagined foes, there came a great flash of lightning above them; and in its lighthe looked down on Beleg’s face. Then Turin stood stonestill and silent, staringon that dreadful death, knowing what he had done; and so terrible was his face,lit by the lightning that flickered all about them, that Gwindor cowered downupon the ground and dared not raise his eyes.
But now in the dell beneath the Ores were aroused, and all the camp was in atumult; for they feared the thunder that came out of the west, believing that itwas sent against them by the great Enemies beyond the Sea. Then a wind arose,and great rains fell, and torrents swept down from the heights of Taur-nu-Fuin;and though Gwindor cried out to Turin, warning him of their utmost peril, hemade no answer, but sat unmoving and unweeping in the tempest beside thebody of Beleg Cuthalion.
When morning came the storm was passed away eastward over Lothlann, andthe sun of autumn rose hot and bright; but believing that Turin would have fledfar away from that place and all trace of his flight be washed away, the Oresdeparted in haste without longer search, and far off Gwindor saw them marchingaway over the steaming sands of Anfauglith. Thus it came to pass that theyreturned to Morgoth emptyhanded, and left behind them the son of Hurin, whosat crazed and unwitting on the slopes of Taur-nu-Fuin, bearing a burden heavierthan their bonds.
Then Gwindor roused Turin to aid him in the burial of Beleg, and he rose asone that walked in sleep; and together they laid Beleg in a shallow grave, andplaced beside him Belthronding his great bow, that was made of black yew-wood. But the dread sword Anglachel Gwindor took, saying that it were better
that it should take vengeance on the servants of Morgoth than lie useless in theearth; and he took also the lembas of Melian to strengthen them in the wild.
Thus ended Beleg Strongbow, truest of friends, greatest in skill of all thatharboured in the woods of Beleriand in the Elder Days, at the hand of him whomhe most loved; and that grief was graven on the face of Turin and never faded.But courage and strength were renewed in the Elf of Nargothrond, and departingfrom Taur-nu-Fuin he led Turin far away. Never once as they wandered togetheron long and grievous paths did Turin speak, and he walked as one without wishor purpose, while the year waned and winter drew on over the northern lands.But Gwindor was ever beside him to guard him and guide him; and thus theypassed westward over Sirion and came at length to Eithel Ivrin, the springswhence Narog rose beneath the Mountains of Shadow. There Gwindor spoke toTurin, saying: ‘Awake, Turin son of Hurin Thalion! On Ivrin’s lake is endlesslaughter. She is fed from crystal fountains unfailing, and guarded fromdefilement by Ulmo, Lord of Waters, who wrought her beauty in ancient days.’Then Turin knelt and drank from that water; and suddenly he cast himself down,and his tears were unloosed at last, and he was healed of his madness.
There he made a song for Beleg, and he named it Laer Cu Beleg, the Song ofthe Great Bow, singing it aloud heedless of peril. And Gwindor gave the swordAnglachel into his hands, and Turin knew that it was heavy and strong and hadgreat power; but its blade was black and dull and its edges blunt. Then Gwindorsaid: ‘This is a strange blade, and unlike any that I have seen in Middle-earth. Itmourns for Beleg even as you do. But be comforted; for I return to Nargothrondof the house of Finarfin, and you shall come with me, and be healed andrenewed.’
‘Who are you?’ said Turin.
‘A wandering Elf, a thrall escaped, whom Beleg met and comforted,’ saidGwindor. ‘Yet once I was Gwindor son of Guilin, a lord of Nargothrond, until Iwent to the Nirnaeth Arnoediad, and was enslaved in Angband.’
‘Then have you seen Hurin son of Galdor, the warrior of Dor-lomin?’ saidTurin.
‘I have not seen him,’ said Gwindor. ‘But rumour of him runs throughAngband that he still defies Morgoth; and Morgoth has laid a curse upon himand all his kin.’
‘That I do believe,’ said Turin.
And now they arose, and departing from Eithel Ivrin they journeyedsouthward along the banks of Narog, until they were taken by scouts of the Elvesand brought as prisoners to the hidden stronghold. Thus did Turin come toNargothrond.
At first his own people did not know Gwindor, who went out young andstrong, and returned now seeming as one of the aged among mortal Men,because of his torments and his labours; but Finduilas daughter of Orodreth theKing knew him and welcomed him, for she had loved him before the Nirnaeth,and so greatly did Gwindor love her beauty that he named her Faelivrin, which isthe gleam of the sun on the pools of Ivrin. For Gwindor’s sake Turin wasadmitted with him into Nargothrond, and he dwelt there in honour. But whenGwindor would tell his name, Turin checked him, saying: T am Agarwaen theson of Umarth (which is the Bloodstained, son of Ill-fate), a hunter in thewoods’; and the Elves of Nargothrond questioned him no more.
In the time that followed Turin grew high in favour with Orodreth, and well-nigh all hearts were turned to him in Nargothrond. For he was young, and onlynow reached his full manhood; and he was in truth the son of Morwen Eledhwento look upon: dark-haired and pale-skinned, with grey eyes, and his face morebeautiful than any other among mortal Men, in the Elder Days. His speech andbearing were that of the ancient kingdom of Doriath, and even among the Elveshe might be taken for one from the great houses of the Noldor; therefore manycalled him Adanedhel, the Elf-Man. The sword Anglachel was forged anew forhim by cunning smiths of Nargothrond, and though ever black its edges shonewith pale fire; and he named it Gurthang, Iron of Death. So great was hisprowess and skill in warfare on the confines of the Guarded Plain that he himselfbecame known as Mormegil, the Black Sword; and the Elves said: TheMormegil cannot be slain, save by mischance, or an evil arrow from afar.’Therefore they gave him dwarf-mail, to guard him; and in a grim mood he foundalso in the armouries a dwarf-mask all gilded, and he put it on before battle, andhis enemies fled before his face.
Then the heart of Finduilas was turned from Gwindor and against her will herlove was given to Turin; but Turin did not perceive what had befallen. Andbeing torn in heart Finduilas became sorrowful; and she grew wan and silent.But Gwindor sat in dark thought; and on a time he spoke to Finduilas, saying:'Daughter of the house of Finarfin, let no grief lie between us; for thoughMorgoth has laid my life in ruin, you still I love. Go whither love leads you; yetbeware! It is not fitting that the Elder Children of Iluvatar should wed with theYounger; nor is it wise, for they are brief, and soon pass, to leave us inwidowhood while the world lasts. Neither will fate suffer it, unless it be once ortwice only, for some high cause of doom that we do not perceive. But this Man is
not Beren. A doom indeed lies on him, as seeing eyes may well read in him, buta dark doom. Enter not into it! And if you will, your love shall betray you tobitterness and death. For hearken to me! Though he be indeed agarwaen son ofumarth, his right name is Turin son of Hurin, whom Morgoth holds in Angband,and whose kin he has cursed. Doubt not the power of Morgoth Bauglir! Is it notwritten in me?’
Then Finduilas sat long in thought; but at the last she said only: ‘Turin son ofHurin loves me not; nor will.’
Now when Turin learnt from Finduilas of what had passed, he was wrathful,and he said to Gwindor: ‘In love I hold you for rescue and safe-keeping. Butnow you have done ill to me, friend, to betray my right name, and call my doomupon me, from which I would lie hid.’
But Gwindor answered: ‘The doom lies in yourself, not in your name.’
When it became known to Orodreth that the Mormegil was in truth the son ofHurin Thalion he gave him great honour, and Turin became mighty among thepeople of Nargothrond. But he had no liking for their manner of warfare, ofambush and stealth and secret arrow, and he yearned for brave strokes and battlein the open; and his counsels weighed with the King ever the longer the more. Inthose days the Elves of Nargothrond forsook their secrecy and went openly tobattle, and great store of weapons were made; and by the counsel of Turin theNoldor built a mighty bridge over the Narog from the Doors of Felagund, for theswifter passage of their arms. Then the servants of Angband were driven out ofall the land between Narog and Sirion eastward, and westward to the Nenningand the desolate Falas; and though Gwindor spoke ever against Turin in thecouncil of the King, holding it an ill policy, he fell into dishonour and noneheeded him, for his strength was small and he was no longer forward in arms.Thus Nargothrond was revealed to the wrath and hatred of Morgoth; but still atTurin’s prayer his true name was not spoken, and though the fame of his deedscame into Doriath and to the ears of Thingol, rumour spoke only of the BlackSword of Nargothrond.
In that time of respite and hope, when because of the deeds of the Mormegilthe power of Morgoth was stemmed west of Sirion, Morwen fled at last fromDor-lomin with Nienor her daughter, and adventured the long journey toThingol’s halls. There new grief awaited her, for she found Turin gone, and toDoriath there had come no tidings since the Dragon-helm had vanished from thelands west of Sirion; but Morwen remained in Doriath with Nienor as guests ofThingol and Melian, and were treated with honour.
Now it came to pass, when four hundred and ninety-five years had passedsince the rising of the Moon, in the spring of the year, there came to Nargothrondtwo Elves, named Gelmir and Arminas; they were of Angrod’s people, but sincethe Dagor Bragollach they dwelt in the south with Cirdan the Shipwright. Fromtheir far journeys they brought tidings of a great mustering of Ores and evilcreatures under the eaves of Ered Wethrin and in the Pass of Sirion; and they toldalso that Ulmo had come to Cirdan, giving warning that great peril drew nigh toNargothrond.
‘Hear the words of the Lord of Waters!’ said they to the King. ‘Thus he spoketo Cirdan the Shipwright: “The Evil of the North has defiled the springs ofSirion, and my power withdraws from the fingers of the flowing waters. But aworse thing is yet to come forth. Say therefore to the Lord of Nargothrond: Shutthe doors of the fortress and go not abroad. Cast the stones of your pride into theloud river, that the creeping evil may not find the gate.’”
Orodreth was troubled by the dark words of the messengers, but Turin wouldby no means hearken to these counsels, and least of all would he suffer the greatbridge to be cast down; for he was become proud and stern, and would order allthings as he wished.
Soon afterwards Handir Lord of Brethil was slain, for the Ores invaded hisland, and Handir gave them battle; but the Men of Brethil were worsted, anddriven back into their woods. And in the autumn of the year, biding his hour,Morgoth loosed upon the people of Narog the great host that he had longprepared; and Glaurung the Uruloki passed over Anfauglith, and came thenceinto the north vales of Sirion and there did great evil. Under the shadows of EredWethrin he defiled the Eithel Ivrin, and thence he passed into the realm ofNargothrond, and burned the Talath Dirnen, the Guarded Plain, between Narogand Teiglin.
Then the warriors of Nargothrond went forth, and tall and terrible on that daylooked Turin, and the heart of the host was upheld, as he rode on the right hand
of Orodreth. But greater far was the host of Morgoth than any scouts had told,and none but Turin defended by his dwarf-mask could withstand the approach ofGlaurung; and the Elves were driven back and pressed by the Ores into the fieldof Tumhalad, between Ginglith and Narog, and there they were penned. On thatday all the pride and host of Nargothrond withered away; and Orodreth was slainin the forefront of the battle, and Gwindor son of Guilin was wounded to thedeath. But Turin came to his aid, and all fled before him; and he bore Gwindorout of the rout, and escaping into a wood there laid him on the grass.
Then Gwindor said to Turin: 'Let bearing pay for bearing! But ill-fated wasmine, and vain is thine; for my body is marred beyond healing, and I must leaveMiddle-earth. And though I love thee, son of Hurin, yet I rue the day that I tookthee from the Ores. But for thy prowess and thy pride, still I should have loveand life, and Nargothrond should yet stand a while. Now if thou love me, leaveme! Haste thee to Nargothrond, and save Finduilas. And this last I say to thee:she alone stands between thee and thy doom. If thou fail her, it shall not fail tofind thee. Farewell ! 5
Then Turin sped back to Nargothrond, mustering such of the rout as he metwith on the way; and the leaves fell from the trees in a great wind as they went,for the autumn was passing to a dire winter. But the host of the Ores andGlaurung the Dragon were there before him, and they came suddenly, ere thosethat were left on guard were aware of what had befallen on the field ofTumhalad. In that day the bridge over Narog proved an evil; for it was great andmightily made and could not swiftly be destroyed, and the enemy came readilyover the deep river, and Glaurung came in full fire against the Doors ofFelagund, and overthrew them, and passed within.
And even as Turin came up the dreadful sack of Nargothrond was well nighachieved. The Ores had slain or driven off all that remained in arms, and wereeven then ransacking the great halls and chambers, plundering and destroying;but those of the women and maidens that were not burned or slain they hadherded on the terraces before the doors, as slaves to be taken into Morgoth’sthraldom. Upon this ruin and woe Turin came, and none could withstand him; orwould not, though he struck down all before him, and passed over the bridge,and hewed his way towards the captives.
And now he stood alone, for the few that followed him had fled. But in thatmoment Glaurung issued from the gaping doors, and lay behind, between Turinand the bridge. Then suddenly he spoke, by the evil spirit that was in him,saying: 'Hail, son of Hurin. Well met!’
Then Turin sprang about, and strode against him, and the edges of Gurthangshone as with flame; but Glaurung withheld his blast, and opened wide his
serpent-eyes and gazed upon Turin. Without fear Turin looked into them as heraised up the sword; and straightway he fell under the binding spell of the lidlesseyes of the dragon, and was halted moveless. Then for a long time he stood asone graven of stone; and they two were alone, silent before the doors ofNargothrond. But Glaurung spoke again, taunting Turin, and he said: 'Evil havebeen all thy ways, son of Hurin. Thankless fosterling, outlaw, slayer of thyfriend, thief of love, usurper of Nargothrond, captain foolhardy, and deserter ofthy kin. As thralls thy mother and thy sister live in Dor-lomin, in misery andwant. Thou art arrayed as a prince, but they go in rags; and for thee they yearn,but thou carest not for that. Glad may thy father be to learn that he hath such ason; as learn he shall.’ And Turin being under the spell of Glaurung hearkened tohis words, and he saw himself as in a mirror misshapen by malice, and loathedthat which he saw.
And while he was yet held by the eyes of the dragon in torment of mind, andcould not stir, the Ores drove away the herded captives, and they passed nigh toTurin and crossed over the bridge. Among them was Finduilas, and she cried outto Turin as she went; but not until her cries and the wailing of the captives waslost upon the northward road did Glaurung release Turin, and he might not stophis ears against that voice that haunted him after.
Then suddenly Glaurung withdrew his glance, and waited; and Turin stirredslowly, as one waking from a hideous dream. Then coming to himself he sprangupon the dragon with a cry. But Glaurung laughed, saying: ‘If thou wilt be slain,I will slay thee gladly. But small help will that be to Morwen and Nienor. Noheed didst thou give to the cries of the Elf-woman. Wilt thou deny also the bondof thy blood?’
But Turin drawing back his sword stabbed at the dragon’s eyes; and Glaumngcoiling back swiftly towered above him, and said: ‘Nay! At least thou art valiant;beyond all whom I have met. And they lie who say that we of our part do nothonour the valour of foes. See now! I offer thee freedom. Go to thy kin, if thoucanst. Get thee gone! And if Elf or Man be left to make tale of these days, thensurely in scorn they will name thee, if thou spurnest this gift.’
Then Turin, being yet bemused by the eyes of the dragon, as were he treatingwith a foe that could know pity, believed the words of Glaurung; and turningaway he sped over the bridge. But as he went Glaurung spoke behind him,saying in a fell voice: ‘Haste thee now, son of Hurin, to Dor-lomin! Or perhapsthe Ores shall come before thee, once again. And if thou tarry for Finduilas, thennever shalt thou see Morwen again, and never at all shalt thou see Nienor thysister; and they will curse thee.’
But Turin passed away on the northward road, and Glaurung laughed once
more, for he had accomplished the errand of his Master. Then he turned to hisown pleasure, and sent forth his blast, and burned all about him. But all the Oresthat were busy in the sack he routed forth, and drove them away, and deniedthem their plunder even to the last thing of worth. The bridge then he brokedown and cast into the foam of Narog; and being thus secure he gathered all thehoard and riches of Felagund and heaped them, and lay upon them in theinnermost hall, and rested a while.
And Turin hastened along the ways to the north, through the lands nowdesolate between Narog and Teiglin, and the Fell Winter came down to meethim; for in that year snow fell ere autumn was passed, and spring came late andcold. Ever it seemed to him as he went that he heard the cries of Finduilas,calling his name by wood and hill, and great was his anguish; but his heart beinghot with the lies of Glaurung, and seeing ever in his mind the Ores burning thehouse of Hurin or putting Morwen and Nienor to torment, he held on his way,and turned never aside.
At last worn by haste and the long road (for forty leagues and more had hejourneyed without rest) he came with the first ice of winter to the pools of Ivrin,where before he had been healed. But they were now but a frozen mire, and hecould drink there no more.
Thus he came hardly by the passes of Dor-lomin, through bitter snows fromthe north, and found again the land of his childhood. Bare and bleak it was; andMorwen was gone. Her house stood empty, broken and cold; and no living thingdwelt nigh. Therefore Turin departed, and came to the house of Brodda theEasterling, he that had to wife Aerin, Hurin’s kinswoman; and there he learnedof an old servant that Morwen was long gone, for she had fled with Nienor outof Dor-lomin, none but Aerin knew where.
Then Turin strode to Brodda’s table, and seizing him he drew his sword, anddemanded that he be told whither Morwen had gone; and Aerin declared to himthat she went to Doriath to seek her son. Tor the lands were freed then fromevil,’ she said, ‘by the Black Sword of the south, who now has fallen, they say.’Then Turin’s eyes were opened, and the last threads of Glaurung’s spell wereloosed; and for anguish, and wrath at the lies that had deluded him, and hatred ofthe oppressors of Morwen, a black rage seized him, and he slew Brodda in hishall, and other Easterlings that were his guests. Thereafter he fled out into thewinter, a hunted man; but he was aided by some that remained of Hador’s peopleand knew the ways of the wild, and with them he escaped through the fallingsnow and came to an outlaws’ refuge in the southern mountains of Dor-lomin.Thence Turin passed again from the land of his childhood, and returned toSirion’s vale. His heart was bitter, for to Dor-lomin he had brought only greaterwoe upon the remnant of his people, and they were glad of his going; and thiscomfort alone he had: that by the prowess of the Black Sword the ways toDoriath had been laid open to Morwen. And he said in his thought: ‘Then thosedeeds wrought not evil to all. And where else might I have better bestowed mykin, even had I come sooner? For if the Girdle of Melian be broken, then lasthope is ended. Nay, it is better indeed as things be; for a shadow I castwheresoever I come. Let Melian keep them! And I will leave them in peaceunshadowed for a while.’
Now Turin coming down from Ered Wethrin sought for Finduilas in vain,roaming the woods beneath the mountains, wild and wary as a beast; and hewaylaid all the roads that went north to the Pass of Sirion. But he was too late;for all the trails had grown old, or were washed away by the winter. Yet thus it
was that passing southwards down Teiglin Turin came upon some of the Men ofBrethil that were surrounded by Ores; and he delivered them, for the Ores fledfrom Gurthang. He named himself Wildman of the Woods, and they besoughthim to come and dwell with them; but he said that he had an errand yetunachieved, to seek Finduilas, Orodreth’s daughter of Nargothrond. Then Dorlas,the leader of those woodmen, told the grievous tidings of her death. For the Menof Brethil had waylaid at the Crossings of Teiglin the Ore-host that led thecaptives of Nargothrond, hoping to rescue them; but the Ores had at once cruellyslain their prisoners, and Finduilas they pinned to a tree with a spear. So shedied, saying at the last: ‘Tell the Mormegil that Finduilas is here.’ Therefore theyhad laid her in a mound near that place, and named it Haudh-en-Elleth, theMound of the Elf-maid.
Turin bade them lead him thither, and there he fell down into a darkness ofgrief that was near death. Then Dorlas by his black sword, the fame whereof hadcome even into the deeps of Brethil, and by his quest of the King’s daughter,knew that this Wildman was indeed the Mormegil of Nargothrond, whomrumour said was the son of Hurin of Dorlomin. Therefore the woodmen liftedhim up, and bore him away to their homes. Now those were set in a stockadeupon a high place in the forest, Ephel Brandir upon Amon Obel; for the Peopleof Haleth were now dwindled by war, and Brandir son of Handir who ruled themwas a man of gentle mood, and lame also from childhood, and he trusted ratherin secrecy than in deeds of war to save them from the power of the North.Therefore he feared the tidings that Dorlas brought, and when he beheld the faceof Turin as he lay on the bier a cloud of foreboding lay on his heart. Nonethelessbeing moved by his woe he took him into his own house and tended him, for hehad skill in healing. And with the beginning of spring Turin cast off hisdarkness, and grew hale again; and he arose, and he thought that he wouldremain in Brethil hidden, and put his shadow behind him, forsaking the past. Hetook therefore a new name, Turambar, which in the High-elven speech signifiedMaster of Doom; and he besought the woodmen to forget that he was a strangeramong them or ever bore any other name. Nonetheless he would not whollyleave deeds of war; for he could not endure that the Ores should come to theCrossings of Teiglin or draw nigh to Haudh-en-Elleth, and he made that a placeof dread for them, so that they shunned it. But he laid his black sword by, andwielded rather the bow and the spear.
Now new tidings came to Doriath concerning Nargothrond, for some that hadescaped from the defeat and the sack and had survived the Fell Winter in thewild, came at last to Thingol seeking refuge; and the march-wardens broughtthem to the King. And some said that all the enemy had withdrawn northwards,and others that Glaurung abode still in the halls of Felagund; and some said thatthe Mormegil was slain, and others that he was cast under a spell by the dragonand dwelt there yet, as one changed to stone. But all declared that it was knownto many in Nargothrond ere the end that Mormegil was none other than Turinson of Hurin of Dor-lomin.
Then Morwen was distraught, and refusing the counsel of Melian she rodeforth alone into the wild to seek her son, or some true tidings of him. Thingoltherefore sent Mablung after her, with many hardy march-wards, to find her andguard her, and to learn what news they might; but Nienor was bidden to remainbehind. Yet the fearlessness of her house was hers; and in an evil hour, in hopethat Morwen would return when she saw that her daughter would go with herinto peril, Nienor disguised herself as one of Thingol’s people, and went withthat ill-fated riding.
They came upon Morwen by the banks of Sirion, and Mablung besought herto return to Menegroth; but she was fey, and would not be persuaded. Then alsothe coming of Nienor was revealed, and despite Morwen’s command she wouldnot go back; and Mablung perforce brought them to the hidden ferries at theMeres of Twilight, and they passed over Sirion. And after three days’ journeyingthey came to Amon Ethir, the Hill of Spies, that long ago Felagund had caused tobe raised with great labour, a league before the doors of Nargothrond. ThereMablung set a guard of riders about Morwen and her daughter, and forbade themto go further. But he, seeing from the hill no sign of any enemy, went down withhis scouts to the Narog, as stealthily as they could go.
But Glaurung was aware of all that they did, and he came forth in heat ofwrath, and lay into the river; and a vast vapour and foul reek went up, in whichMablung and his company were blinded and lost. Then Glaurung passed eastover Narog.
Seeing the onset of the dragon the guards upon Amon Ethir sought to leadMorwen and Nienor away, and fly with them with all speed back eastwards; butthe wind bore the blank mists upon them, and their horses were maddened by thedragon-stench, and were ungovernable, and ran this way and that, so that some
were dashed against trees and were slain, and others were borne far away. Thusthe ladies were lost, and of Morwen indeed no sure tidings came ever to Doriathafter. But Nienor, being thrown by her steed, yet unhurt, made her way back toAmon Ethir, there to await Mablung, and came thus above the reek into thesunlight; and looking westward she stared straight into the eyes of Glaurung,whose head lay upon the hill-top.
Her will strove with him for a while, but he put forth his power, and havinglearned who she was he constrained her to gaze into his eyes, and he laid a spellof utter darkness and forgetfulness upon her, so that she could remember nothingthat had ever befallen her, nor her own name, nor the name of any other thing;and for many days she could neither hear, nor see, nor stir by her own will. ThenGlaurung left her standing alone upon Amon Ethir, and went back toNargothrond.
Now Mablung, who greatly daring had explored the halls of Felagund whenGlaurung left them, fled from them at the approach of the dragon, and returnedto Amon Ethir. The sun sank and night fell as he climbed the hill, and he foundnone there save Nienor, standing alone under the stars as an image of stone. Noword she spoke or heard, but would follow, if he took up her hand. Therefore ingreat grief he led her away, though it seemed to him vain; for they were both liketo perish, succourless in the wild.
But they were found by three of Mablung’s companions, and slowly theyjourneyed northward and eastward towards the fences of the land of Doriathbeyond Sirion, and the guarded bridge nigh to the inflowing of Esgalduin.Slowly the strength of Nienor returned as they drew nearer to Doriath; but stillshe could not speak or hear, and walked blindly as she was led. But even as theydrew near the fences at last she closed her staring eyes, and would sleep; andthey laid her down, and rested also, unheedfully, for they were utterly outworn.There they were assailed by an Ore-band, such as now roamed often as nigh thefences of Doriath as they dared. But Nienor in that hour recovered hearing andsight, and being awakened by the cries of the Ores she sprang up in terror, andfled ere they could come to her.
Then the Ores gave chase, and the Elves after; and they overtook the Ores andslew them ere they could harm her, but Nienor escaped them. For she fled as in amadness of fear, swifter than a deer, and tore off all her clothing as she ran, untilshe was naked; and she passed out of their sight, running northward, and thoughthey sought her long they found her not, nor any trace of her. And at lastMablung in despair returned to Menegroth and told the tidings. Then Thingoland Melian were filled with grief; but Mablung went forth, and sought long invain for tidings of Morwen and Nienor.
But Nienor ran on into the woods until she was spent, and then fell, and slept,and awoke; and it was a sunlit morning, and she rejoiced in light as it were a newthing, and all things else that she saw seemed new and strange, for she had nonames for them. Nothing did she remember save a darkness that lay behind her,and a shadow of fear; therefore she went warily as a hunted beast, and becamefamished, for she had no food and knew not how to seek it. But coming at last tothe Crossings of Teiglin she passed over, seeking the shelter of the great trees ofBrethil, for she was afraid, and it seemed to her that the darkness was overtakingher again from which she had fled.
But it was a great storm of thunder that came up from the south, and in terrorshe cast herself down upon the mound of Haudh-en-Elleth, stopping her earsfrom the thunder; but the rain smote her and drenched her, and she lay like awild beast that is dying. There Turambar found her, as he came to the Crossingsof Teiglin, having heard rumour of Ores that roamed near; and seeing in a flareof lightning the body as it seemed of a slain maiden lying upon the mound ofFinduilas he was stricken to the heart. But the woodmen lifted her up, andTurambar cast his cloak about her, and they took her to a lodge nearby, andwarmed her, and gave her food. And as soon as she looked upon Turambar shewas comforted, for it seemed to her that she had found at last something that shehad sought in her darkness; and she would not be parted from him. But when heasked her concerning her name and her kin and her misadventure, then shebecame troubled as a child that perceives that something is demanded but cannotunderstand what it may be; and she wept. Therefore Turambar said: ‘Do not betroubled. The tale shall wait. But I will give you a name, and I will call youNiniel, Tear-maiden.’ And at that name she shook her head, but said: Niniel.That was the first word she spoke after her darkness, and it remained her nameamong the woodmen ever after.
On the next day they bore her towards Ephel Brandir; but when they came toDimrost, the Rainy Stair, where the tumbling stream of Celebros fell towardsTeiglin, a great shuddering came upon her, wherefore afterwards that place wascalled Nen Girith, the Shuddering Water. Ere she came to the home of thewoodmen upon Amon Obel she was sick of a fever; and long she lay thus,tended by the women of Brethil, and they taught her language as to an infant.But ere the autumn came by the skill of Brandir she was healed of her sickness,and she could speak; but nothing did she remember of the time before she wasfound by Turambar on the mound of Haudh-en-Elleth. And Brandir loved her;but all her heart was given to Turambar.
In that time the woodmen were not troubled by the Ores, and Turambar wentnot to war, and there was peace in Brethil. His heart turned to Niniel, and he
asked her in marriage; but for that time she delayed in spite of her love. ForBrandir foreboded he knew not what, and sought to restrain her, rather for hersake than his own or rivalry with Turambar; and he revealed to her thatTurambar was Turin son of Hurin, and though she knew not the name a shadowfell upon her mind.
But when three years were passed since the sack of Nargothrond Turambarasked Niniel again, and vowed that now he would wed her, or else go back towar in the wild. And Niniel took him with joy, and they were wedded at themidsummer, and the woodmen of Brethil made a great feast. But ere the end ofthe year Glaurung sent Ores of his dominion against Brethil; and Turambar sat athome deedless, for he had promised to Niniel that he would go to battle only iftheir homes were assailed. But the woodmen were worsted, and Dorlasupbraided him that he would not aid the people that he had taken for his own.Then Turambar arose and brought forth again his black sword, and he gathered agreat company of the Men of Brethil, and they defeated the Ores utterly. ButGlaurung heard tidings that the Black Sword was in Brethil, and he ponderedwhat he heard, devising new evil.
In the spring of the year after Niniel conceived, and she became wan and sad;and at the same time there came to Ephel Brandir the first rumours that Glaurunghad issued from Nargothrond. Then Turambar sent out scouts far afield, for nowhe ordered things as he would, and few gave heed to Brandir. As it drew near tosummer Glaurung came to the borders of Brethil, and lay near the west shores ofTeiglin; and then there was great fear among the woodfolk, for it was now plainthat the Great Worm would assail them and ravage their land, and not pass by,returning to Angband, as they had hoped. They sought therefore the counsel ofTurambar; and he counselled them that it was vain to go against Glaurung withall their force, for only by cunning and good fortune could they defeat him. Heoffered therefore himself to seek the dragon on the borders of the land, and badethe rest of the people to remain at Ephel Brandir, but to prepare for flight. For ifGlaurung had the victory, he would come first to the woodmen’s homes todestroy them, and they could not hope to withstand him; but if they thenscattered far and wide then many might escape, for Glaurung would not take uphis dwelling in Brethil, and would return soon to Nargothrond.
Then Turambar asked for companions willing to aid him in his peril; andDorlas stood forth, but no others. Therefore Dorlas upbraided the people, andspoke scorn of Brandir, who could not play the part of the heir of the house ofHaleth; and Brandir was shamed before his people, and was bitter at heart. ButHunthor, kinsman of Brandir, asked his leave to go in his stead. Then Turambarsaid farewell to Niniel, and she was filled with fear and foreboding, and their
parting was sorrowful; but Turambar set out with his two companions and wentto Nen Girith.
Then Niniel being unable to endure her fear, and unwilling to wait in theEphel tidings of Turambar’s fortune, set forth after him, and a great companywent with her. At this Brandir was filled all the more with dread, and he soughtto dissuade her and the people that would go with her from this rashness, butthey heeded him not. Therefore he renounced his lordship, and all love for thepeople that had scorned him, and having naught left but his love for Niniel hegirt himself with a sword and went after her; but being lame he fell far behind.
Now Turambar came to Nen Girith at sundown, and there he learned thatGlaurung lay on the brink of the high shores of Teiglin, and was like to movewhen night fell. Then he called those tidings good; for the dragon lay at Cabed-en-Aras, where the river ran in a deep and narrow gorge that a hunted deer mightoverleap, and Turambar thought that he would seek no further, but wouldattempt to pass over the gorge. Therefore he purposed to creep down at dusk,and descend into the ravine under night, and cross over the wild water; and thento climb up the further cliff, and so come to the dragon beneath his guard.
This counsel he took, but the heart of Dorlas failed when they came to theraces of Teiglin in the dark, and he dared not attempt the perilous crossing, butdrew back and lurked in the woods, burdened with shame. Turambar andHunthor, nonetheless, crossed over in safety, for the loud roaring of the waterdrowned all other sounds, and Glaurung slept. But ere the middle-night thedragon roused, and with a great noise and blast cast his forward part across thechasm, and began to draw his bulk after. Turambar and Hunthor were well-nighovercome by the heat and the stench, as they sought in haste for a way up tocome at Glaurung; and Hunthor was slain by a great stone that was dislodgedfrom on high by the passage of the dragon, and smote him on the head and casthim into the river. So he ended, of the house of Haleth not the least valiant.
Then Turambar summoned all his will and courage and climbed the cliffalone, and came beneath the dragon. Then he drew Gurthang, and with all themight of his arm, and of his hate, he thrust it into the soft belly of the Worm,even up to the hilts. But when Glaurung felt his death-pang, he screamed, and inhis dreadful throe he heaved up his bulk and hurled himself across the chasm,and there lay lashing and coiling in his agony. And he set all in a blaze abouthim, and beat all to ruin, until at last his fires died, and he lay still.
Now Gurthang had been wrested from Turambar’s hand in the throe ofGlaurung, and it clave to the belly of the dragon. Turambar therefore crossed thewater once more, desiring to recover his sword and to look upon his foe; and hefound him stretched at his length, and rolled upon one side, and the hilts of
Gurthang stood in his belly. Then Turambar seized the hilts and set his foot uponthe belly, and cried in mockery of the dragon and his words at Nargothrond:‘Hail, Worm of Morgoth! Well met again! Die now and the darkness have thee!Thus is Turin son of Hurin avenged.’
Then he wrenched out the sword, but a spout of black blood followed it, andfell on his hand, and the venom burned it. And thereupon Glaurung opened hiseyes and looked upon Turambar with such malice that it smote him as a blow;and by that stroke and the anguish of the venom he fell into a dark swoon, andlay as one dead, and his sword was beneath him.
The screams of Glaurung rang in the woods, and came to the people thatwaited at Nen Girith; and when those that looked forth heard them, and saw afarthe ruin and burning that the dragon made, they deemed that he had triumphedand was destroying those that assailed him. And Niniel sat and shuddered besidethe falling water, and at the voice of Glaurung her darkness crept upon her again,so that she could not stir from that place of her own will.
Even so Brandir found her, for he came to Nen Girith at last, limping wearily;and when he heard that the dragon had crossed the river and had beaten down hisfoes, his heart yearned towards Niniel in pity. Yet he thought also: ‘Turambar isdead, but Niniel lives. Now it may be that she will come with me, and I will leadher away, and so we shall escape from the dragon together.’ After a whiletherefore he stood by Niniel, and he said: ‘Come! It is time to go. If you will, Iwill lead you.’ And he took her hand, and she arose silently, and followed him;and in the darkness none saw them go.
But as they went down the path to the Crossings the moon rose, and cast agrey light on the land, and Niniel said: ‘Is this the way?’ And Brandir answeredthat he knew no way, save to flee as they might from Glaurung, and escape intothe wild. But Niniel said: ‘The Black Sword was my beloved and my husband.To seek him only do I go. What else could you think?’ And she sped on beforehim. Thus she came towards the Crossings of Teiglin and beheld Haudh-en-Elleth in the white moonlight, and great dread came on her. Then with a cry sheturned away, casting off her cloak, and fled southward along the river, and herwhite raiment shone in the moon.
Thus Brandir saw her from the hill-side, and turned to cross her path, but hewas still behind her when she came to the ruin of Glaurung nigh the brink ofCabed-en-Aras. There she saw the dragon lying, but she heeded him not, for aman lay beside him; and she ran to Turambar, and called his name in vain. Thenfinding that his hand was burned she washed it with tears and bound it aboutwith a strip of her raiment, and she kissed him and cried on him again to awake.Thereat Glaurung stirred for the last time ere he died, and he spoke with his last
breath, saying: ‘Hail, Nienor, daughter of Hurin. We meet again ere the end. Igive thee joy that thou hast found thy brother at last. And now thou shalt knowhim: a stabber in the dark, treacherous to foes, faithless to friends, and a curseunto his kin, Turin son of Hurin! But the worst of all his deeds thou shalt feel inthyself.’
Then Glaurung died, and the veil of his malice was taken from her, and sheremembered all the days of her life. Looking down upon Turin she cried:‘Farewell, O twice beloved! A Turin Turambar turun ambartanen : master ofdoom by doom mastered! O happy to be dead!’ Then Brandir who had heard all,standing stricken upon the edge of ruin, hastened towards her; but she ran fromhim distraught with horror and anguish, and coming to the brink of Cabed-en-Aras she cast herself over, and was lost in the wild water.
Then Brandir came and looked down, and turned away in horror; and thoughhe no longer desired life, he could not seek death in that roaring water. Andthereafter no man looked again upon Cabed-en-Aras, nor would any beast orbird come there, nor any tree grow; and it was named Cabed Naeramarth, theLeap of Dreadful Doom.
But Brandir made his way back to Nen Girith, to bring tidings to the people;and he met Dorlas in the woods, and slew him: the first blood that ever he hadspilled, and the last. And he came to Nen Girith, and men cried to him: ‘Haveyou seen her? For Niniel is gone.’
And he answered: ‘Niniel is gone for ever. The Dragon is dead, and Turambaris dead; and those tidings are good.’ The people murmured at these words,saying that he was crazed; but Brandir said: ‘Hear me to the end! Niniel thebeloved is also dead. She cast herself into Teiglin, desiring life no more; for shelearned that she was none other than Nienor daughter of Hurin of Dor-lomin, ereher forgetfulness came upon her, and that Turambar was her brother, Turin sonof Hurin.’
But even as he ceased, and the people wept, Turin himself came before them.For when the dragon died, his swoon left him, and he fell into a deep sleep ofweariness. But the cold of the night troubled him, and the hilts of Gurthangdrove into his side, and he awoke. Then he saw that one had tended his hand,and he wondered much that he was left nonetheless to lie upon the cold ground;and he called, and hearing no answer he went in search of aid, for he was wearyand sick.
But when the people saw him they drew back in fear, thinking that it was hisunquiet spirit; and he said: ‘Nay, be glad; for the Dragon is dead, and I live. Butwherefore have you scorned my counsel, and come into peril? And where isNiniel? For her I would see. And surely you did not bring her from her home?’
Then Brandir told him that it was so, and Niniel was dead. But the wife ofDorlas cried out: ‘Nay, lord, he is crazed. For he came here saying that you weredead, and he called it good tidings. But you live.’
Then Turambar was wrathful, and believed that all Brandir said or did wasdone in malice towards himself and Niniel, begrudging their love; and he spokeevilly to Brandir, calling him Club-foot. Then Brandir reported all that he hadheard, and named Niniel Nienor daughter of Hurin, and he cried out uponTurambar with the last words of Glaurung, that he was a curse unto his kin andto all that harboured him.
Then Turambar fell into a fury, for in those words he heard the feet of hisdoom overtaking him; and he charged Brandir with leading Niniel to her death,and publishing with delight the lies of Glaurung, if indeed he devised them nothimself. Then he cursed Brandir, and slew him; and he fled from the people intothe woods. But after a while his madness left him, and he came to Haudh-en-Elleth, and there sat, and pondered all his deeds. And he cried upon Finduilas tobring him counsel; for he knew not whether he would do now more ill to go toDoriath to seek his kin, or to forsake them for ever and seek death in battle.
And even as he sat there Mablung with a company of Grey-elves came overthe Crossings of Teiglin, and he knew Turin, and hailed him, and was gladindeed to find him yet living; for he had learned of the coming forth of Glaurungand that his path led to Brethil, and also he had heard report that the BlackSword of Nargothrond now dwelt there. Therefore he came to give warning toTurin, and help if need be; but Turin said: ‘You come too late. The Dragon isdead.’
Then they marvelled, and gave him great praise; but he cared nothing for it,and said: ‘This only I ask: give me news of my kin, for in Dor-lomin I learnedthat they had gone to the Hidden Kingdom/
Then Mablung was dismayed, but needs must tell to Turin how Morwen waslost, and Nienor cast into a spell of dumb forgetfulness, and how she escapedthem upon the borders of Doriath and fled northwards. Then at last Turin knewthat doom had overtaken him, and that he had slain Brandir unjustly; so that thewords of Glaurung were fulfilled in him. And he laughed as one fey, crying:‘This is a bitter jest indeed!’ But he bade Mablung go, and return to Doriath,with curses upon it. ‘And a curse too upon your errand!’ he cried. ‘This only waswanting. Now comes the night.’
Then he fled from them like the wind, and they were amazed, wondering whatmadness had seized him; and they followed after him. But Turin far out-ranthem; and he came to Cabed-en-Aras, and heard the roaring of the water, andsaw that all the leaves fell sere from the trees, as though winter had come. There
he drew forth his sword, that now alone remained to him of all his possessions,and he said: ‘Hail Gurthang! No lord or loyalty dost thou know, save the handthat wieldeth thee. From no blood wilt thou shrink. Wilt thou therefore takeTurin Turambar, wilt thou slay me swiftly ? 5
And from the blade rang a cold voice in answer: ‘Yea, I will drink thy bloodgladly, that so I may forget the blood of Beleg my master, and the blood ofBrandir slain unjustly. I will slay thee swiftly . 5
Then Turin set the hilts upon the ground, and cast himself upon the point ofGurthang, and the black blade took his life. But Mablung and the Elves cameand looked on the shape of Glaurung lying dead, and upon the body of Turin,and they grieved; and when Men of Brethil came thither, and they learned thereasons of Turin’s madness and death, they were aghast; and Mablung saidbitterly: ‘I also have been meshed in the doom of the Children of Hurin, and thuswith my tidings have slain one that I loved . 5
Then they lifted up Turin, and found that Gurthang had broken asunder. ButElves and Men gathered there great store of wood, and they made a mightyburning, and the Dragon was consumed to ashes. Turin they laid in a highmound where he had fallen, and the shards of Gurthang were laid beside him.And when all was done, the Elves sang a lament for the Children of Hurin, and agreat grey stone was set upon the mound, and thereon was carven in runes ofDoriath:
TURIN TURAMBAR DAGNIR GLAURUNGAand beneath they wrote also:
NIENOR NINIEL
But she was not there, nor was it ever known whither the cold waters ofTeiglin had taken her.
CHAPTER 22
OF THE RUIN OF DORIATH
So ended the tale of Turin Turambar; but Morgoth did not sleep nor rest fromevil, and his dealings with the house of Hador were not yet ended. Against themhis malice was unsated, though Hurin was under his eye, and Morwen wandereddistraught in the wild.
Unhappy was the lot of Hurin; for all that Morgoth knew of the working of hismalice Hurin knew also, but lies were mingled with the truth, and aught that wasgood was hidden or distorted. In all ways Morgoth sought most to cast an evillight on those things that Thingol and Melian had done, for he hated them, andfeared them. When therefore he judged the time to be ripe, he released Hurinfrom his bondage, bidding him go whither he would; and he feigned that in thishe was moved by pity as for an enemy utterly defeated. But he lied, for hispurpose was that Hurin should still further his hatred for Elves and Men, ere hedied.
Then little though he trusted the words of Morgoth, knowing indeed that hewas without pity, Hurin took his freedom, and went forth in grief, embittered bythe words of the Dark Lord; and a year was now gone since the death of Turinhis son. For twenty-eight years he had been captive in Angband, and he wasgrown grim to look upon. His hair and beard were white and long, but he walkedunbowed, bearing a great black staff; and he was girt with a sword. Thus hepassed into Hithlum, and tidings came to the chieftains of the Easterlings thatthere was a great riding of captains and black soldiers of Angband over the sandsof Anfauglith, and with them came an old man, as one that was held in highhonour. Therefore they did not lay hands on Hurin, but let him walk at will inthose lands; in which they were wise, for the remnant of his own people shunnedhim, because of his coming from Angband as one in league and honour withMorgoth.
Thus his freedom did but increase the bitterness of Hurin’s heart; and hedeparted from the land of Hithlum and went up into the mountains. Thence hedescried far off amid the clouds the peaks of the Crissaegrim, and heremembered Turgon; and he desired to come again to the hidden realm ofGondolin. He went down therefore from Ered Wethrin, and he knew not that thecreatures of Morgoth watched all his steps; and crossing over the Brithiach hepassed into Dimbar, and came to the dark feet of the Echoriath. All the land wascold and desolate, and he looked about him with little hope, standing at the footof a great fall of stones beneath a sheer rock-wall; and he knew not that this wasall that was now left to see of the old Way of Escape: the Dry River was blocked,
and the arched gate was buried. Then Hurin looked up to the grey sky, thinkingthat he might once more descry the eagles, as he had done long ago in his youth;but he saw only the shadows blown from the east, and clouds swirling about theinaccessible peaks, and he heard only the wind hissing over the stones.
But the watch of the great eagles was now redoubled, and they marked Hurinwell, far below, forlorn in the fading light; and straightway Thorondor himself,since the tidings seemed great, brought word to Turgon. But Turgon said: ‘DoesMorgoth sleep? You were mistaken.’
‘Not so,’ said Thorondor. ‘If the Eagles of Manwe were wont to err thus, thenlong ago, lord, your hiding would have been in vain.’
‘Then your words bode ill,’ said Turgon; ‘for they can bear but one meaning.Even Hurin Thalion has surrendered to the will of Morgoth. My heart is shut.’
But when Thorondor was gone, Turgon sat long in thought, and he wastroubled, remembering the deeds of Hurin of Dor-lomin; and he opened hisheart, and sent to the eagles to seek for Hurin, and to bring him if they might toGondolin. But it was too late, and they never saw him again in light or inshadow.
For Hurin stood in despair before the silent cliffs of the Echoriath, and thewestering sun, piercing the clouds, stained his white hair with red. Then he criedaloud in the wilderness, heedless of any ears, and he cursed the pitiless land; andstanding at last upon a high rock he looked towards Gondolin and called in agreat voice: ‘Turgon, Turgon, remember the Fen of Serech! O Turgon, will younot hear in your hidden halls?’ But there was no sound save the wind in the drygrasses. ‘Even so they hissed in Serech at the sunset,’ he said; and as he spokethe sun went behind the Mountains of Shadow, and a darkness fell about him,and the wind ceased, and there was silence in the waste.
Yet there were ears that heard the words that Hurin spoke, and report of allcame soon to the Dark Throne in the north; and Morgoth smiled, for he knewnow clearly in what region Turgon dwelt, though because of the eagles no spy ofhis could yet come within sight of the land behind the Encircling Mountains.This was the first evil that the freedom of Hurin achieved.
As darkness fell Hurin stumbled from the rock, and fell into a heavy sleep ofgrief. But in his sleep he heard the voice of Morwen lamenting, and often shespoke his name; and it seemed to him that her voice came out of Brethil.Therefore when he awoke with the coming of day he arose, and went back to theBrithiach; and passing along the eaves of Brethil he came at a time of night tothe Crossings of Teiglin. The night-sentinels saw him, but they were filled withdread, for they thought that they saw a ghost out of some ancient battle-moundthat walked with darkness about it; and therefore Hurin was not stayed, and he
came at last to the place of the burning of Glaurung, and saw the tall stonestanding near the brink of Cabed Naeramarth.
But Hurin did not look at the stone, for he knew what was written there; andhis eyes had seen that he was not alone. Sitting in the shadow of the stone therewas a woman, bent over her knees; and as Hurin stood there silent she cast backher tattered hood and lifted her face. Grey she was and old, but suddenly hereyes looked into his, and he knew her; for though they were wild and full of fear,that light still gleamed in them that long ago had earned for her the nameEledhwen, proudest and most beautiful of mortal women in the days of old.
‘You come at last,’ she said. ‘I have waited too long.’
‘It was a dark road. I have come as I could,’ he answered.
‘But you are too late,’ said Morwen. ‘They are lost.’
‘I know it,’ he said. ‘But you are not.’
But Morwen said: ‘Almost. I am spent. I shall go with the sun. Now little timeis left: if you know, tell me! How did she find him?’
But Hurin did not answer, and they sat beside the stone, and did not speakagain; and when the sun went down Morwen sighed and clasped his hand, andwas still; and Hurin knew that she had died. He looked down at her in thetwilight and it seemed to him that the lines of grief and cruel hardship weresmoothed away. ‘She was not conquered,’ he said; and he closed her eyes, andsat unmoving beside her as the night drew down. The waters of CabedNaeramarth roared on, but he heard no sound, and he saw nothing, and feltnothing, for his heart was stone within him. But there came a chill wind thatdrove sharp rain into his face; and he was roused, and anger rose in him likesmoke, mastering reason, so that all his desire was to seek vengeance for hiswrongs and for the wrongs of his kin, accusing in his anguish all those who everhad dealings with them. Then he rose up, and he made a grave for Morwenabove Cabed Naeramarth on the west side of the stone; and upon it he cut thesewords: Here lies also Morwen Eledhwen.
It is told that a seer and harp-player of Brethil named Glirhuin made a song,saying that the Stone of the Hapless should not be defiled by Morgoth nor everthrown down, not though the sea should drown all the land; as after indeedbefell, and still Tol Morwen stands alone in the water beyond the new coasts thatwere made in the days of the wrath of the Valar. But Hurin does not lie there, forhis doom drove him on, and the Shadow still followed him.
Now Hurin crossed over Teiglin and passed southwards down the ancient roadthat led to Nargothrond; and he saw far off to the eastward the lonely height of
Amon Rudh, and knew what had befallen there. At length he came to the banksof Narog, and ventured the passage of the wild river upon the fallen stones of thebridge, as Mablung of Doriath had ventured it before him; and he stood beforethe broken Doors of Felagund, leaning upon his staff.
Here it must be told that after the departure of Glaurung Mim the Petty-Dwarfhad found his way to Nargothrond, and crept within the ruined halls; and he tookpossession of them, and sat there fingering the gold and the gems, letting themmn ever through his hands, for none came nigh to despoil him, from dread of thespirit of Glaurung and his very memory. But now one had come, and stood uponthe threshold; and Mim came forth, and demanded to know his purpose. ButHurin said: ‘Who are you, that would hinder me from entering the house ofFinrod Felagund?’
Then the Dwarf answered: ‘I am Mim; and before the proud ones came fromover the Sea, Dwarves delved the halls of Nulukkizdin. I have but returned totake what is mine; for I am the last of my people.’
‘Then you shall enjoy your inheritance no longer,’ said Hurin; ‘for I am Hurinson of Galdor, returned out of Angband, and my son was Turin Turambar, whomyou have not forgotten; and he it was that slew Glaurung the Dragon, whowasted these halls where now you sit; and not unknown is it to me by whom theDragon-helm of Dor-lomin was betrayed.’
Then Mim in great fear besought Hurin to take what he would, but to spare hislife; but Hurin gave no heed to his prayer, and slew him there before the doors ofNargothrond. Then he entered in, and stayed a while in that dreadful place,where the treasures of Valinor lay strewn upon the floors in darkness and decay;but it is told that when Hurin came forth from the wreck of Nargothrond andstood again beneath the sky he bore with him out of all that great hoard but onething only.
Now Hurin journeyed eastward, and he came to the Meres of Twilight abovethe Falls of Sirion; and there he was taken by the Elves that guarded the westernmarches of Doriath, and brought before King Thingol in the Thousand Caves.Then Thingol was filled with wonder and grief when he looked on him, andknew that grim and aged man for Hurin Thalion, the captive of Morgoth; but hegreeted him fairly and showed him honour. Hurin made no answer to the King,but drew forth from beneath his cloak that one thing which he had taken withhim out of Nargothrond; and that was no lesser treasure than the Nauglamir, theNecklace of the Dwarves, that was made for Finrod Felagund long years beforeby the craftsmen of Nogrod and Belegost, most famed of all their works in theElder Days, and prized by Finrod while he lived above all the treasures ofNargothrond. And Hurin cast it at the feet of Thingol with wild and bitter words.
‘Receive thou thy fee/ he cried, ‘for thy fair keeping of my children and mywife! For this is the Nauglamir, whose name is known to many among Elves andMen; and I bring it to thee out of the darkness of Nargothrond, where Finrod thykinsman left it behind him when he set forth with Beren son of Barahir to fulfilthe errand of Thingol of DoriathF
Then Thingol looked upon the great treasure, and knew it for the Nauglamir,and well did he understand Hurin’s intent; but being filled with pity he restrainedhis wrath, and endured Hurin’s scorn. And at the last Melian spoke, and said:‘Hurin Thalion, Morgoth hath bewitched thee; for he that seeth throughMorgoth’s eyes, willing or unwilling, seeth all things crooked. Long was Turinthy son fostered in the halls of Menegroth, and shown love and honour as the sonof the King; and it was not by the King’s will nor by mine that he came neverback to Doriath. And afterwards thy wife and thy daughter were harboured herewith honour and goodwill; and we sought by all means that we might to dissuadeMorwen from the road to Nargothrond. With the voice of Morgoth thou dostnow upbraid thy friends.’
And hearing the words of Melian Hurin stood moveless, and he gazed longinto the eyes of the Queen; and there in Menegroth, defended still by the Girdleof Melian from the darkness of the Enemy, he read the truth of all that was done,and tasted at last the fullness of woe that was measured for him by MorgothBauglir. And he spoke no more of what was past, but stooping lifted up theNauglamir from where it lay before Thingol’s chair, and he gave it to him,saying: ‘Receive now, lord, the Necklace of the Dwarves, as a gift from one whohas nothing, and as a memorial of Hurin of Dor-lomin. For now my fate isfulfilled, and the purpose of Morgoth achieved; but I am his thrall no longer.’
Then he turned away, and passed out from the Thousand Caves, and all thatsaw him fell back before his face; and none sought to withstand his going, nordid any know whither he went. But it is said that Hurin would not live thereafter,being bereft of all purpose and desire, and cast himself at last into the westernsea; and so ended the mightiest of the warriors of mortal Men.
But when Hurin was gone from Menegroth, Thingol sat long in silence,gazing upon the great treasure that lay upon his knees; and it came into his mindthat it should be remade, and in it should be set the Silmaril. For as the yearspassed Thingol’s thought turned unceasingly to the jewel of Feanor, and becamebound to it, and he liked not to let it rest even behind the doors of his inmosttreasury; and he was minded now to bear it with him always, waking andsleeping.
In those days the Dwarves still came on their journeys into Beleriand fromtheir mansions in Ered Findon, and passing over Gelion at Sam Athrad, the Fordof Stones, they travelled the ancient road to Doriath; for their skill in theworking of metal and stone was very great, and there was much need of theircraft in the halls of Menegroth. But they came now no longer in small parties asaforetime, but in great companies well armed for their protection in the perilouslands between Aros and Gelion; and they dwelt in Menegroth at such times inchambers and smithies set apart for them. At that very time great craftsmen ofNogrod were lately come into Doriath; and the King therefore summoning themdeclared his desire, that if their skill were great enough they should remake theNauglamir, and in it set the Silmaril. Then the Dwarves looked upon the work oftheir fathers, and they beheld with wonder the shining jewel of Feanor; and theywere filled with a great lust to possess them, and carry them off to their farhomes in the mountains. But they dissembled their mind, and consented to thetask.
Fong was their labour; and Thingol went down alone to their deep smithies,and sat ever among them as they worked. In time his desire was achieved, andthe greatest of the works of Elves and Dwarves were brought together and madeone; and its beauty was very great, for now the countless jewels of theNauglamir did reflect and cast abroad in marvellous hues the light of the Silmarilamidmost. Then Thingol, being alone among them, made to take it up and claspit about his neck; but the Dwarves in that moment withheld it from him, anddemanded that he yield it up to them, saying: ‘By what right does the Elvenkinglay claim to the Nauglamir, that was made by our fathers for Finrod Felagundwho is dead? It has come to him but by the hand of Hurin the Man of Dor-lomin,who took it as a thief out of the darkness of Nargothrond? But Thingol perceivedtheir hearts, and saw well that desiring the Silmaril they sought but a pretext andfair cloak for their true intent; and in his wrath and pride he gave no heed to hisperil, but spoke to them in scorn, saying: ‘How do ye of uncouth race dare todemand aught of me, Elu Thingol, Ford of Beleriand, whose life began by thewaters of Cuivienen years uncounted ere the fathers of the stunted peopleawoke ? 5 And standing tall and proud among them he bade them with shamefulwords be gone unrequited out of Doriath.
Then the lust of the Dwarves was kindled to rage by the words of the King;and they rose up about him, and laid hands on him, and slew him as he stood. Sodied in the deep places of Menegroth Elwe Singollo, King of Doriath, who aloneof all the Children of Iluvatar was joined with one of the Ainur; and he who,alone of the Forsaken Elves, had seen the light of the Trees of Valinor, with hislast sight gazed upon the Silmaril.
Then the Dwarves taking the Nauglamir passed out of Menegroth and fledeastwards through Region. But tidings went swiftly through the forest, and fewof that company came over Aros, for they were pursued to the death as theysought the eastward road; and the Nauglamir was retaken, and brought back inbitter grief to Melian the Queen. Yet two there were of the slayers of Thingolwho escaped from the pursuit on the eastern marches, and returned at last to theircity far off in the Blue Mountains; and there in Nogrod they told somewhat of allthat had befallen, saying that the Dwarves were slain in Doriath by command ofthe Elvenking, who thus would cheat them of their reward.
Then great was the wrath and lamentation of the Dwarves of Nogrod for thedeath of their kin and their great craftsmen, and they tore their beards, andwailed; and long they sat taking thought for vengeance. It is told that they askedaid from Belegost, but it was denied them, and the Dwarves of Belegost soughtto dissuade them from their purpose; but their counsel was unavailing, and erelong a great host came forth from Nogrod, and crossing over Gelion marchedwestward through Beleriand.
Upon Doriath a heavy change had fallen. Melian sat long in silence besideThingol the King, and her thought passed back into the starlit years and to theirfirst meeting among the nightingales of Nan Elmoth in ages past; and she knewthat her parting from Thingol was the forerunner of a greater parting, and thatthe doom of Doriath was drawing nigh. For Melian was of the divine race of theValar, and she was a Maia of great power and wisdom; but for love of ElweSingollo she took upon herself the form of the Elder Children of Iluvatar, and inthat union she became bound by the chain and trammels of the flesh of Arda. Inthat form she bore to him Luthien Tinuviel; and in that form she gained a powerover the substance of Arda, and by the Girdle of Melian was Doriath defendedthrough long ages from the evils without. But now Thingol lay dead, and hisspirit had passed to the halls of Mandos; and with his death a change came alsoupon Melian. Thus it came to pass that her power was withdrawn in that timefrom the forests of Neldoreth and Region, and Esgalduin the enchanted riverspoke with a different voice, and Doriath lay open to its enemies.
Thereafter Melian spoke to none save to Mablung only, bidding him take heedto the Silmaril, and to send word speedily to Beren and Luthien in Ossiriand; andshe vanished out of Middle-earth, and passed to the land of the Valar beyond thewestern sea, to muse upon her sorrows in the gardens of Lorien, whence shecame, and this tale speaks of her no more.
Thus it was that the host of the Naugrim crossing over Aros passed
unhindered into the woods of Doriath; and none withstood them, for they weremany and fierce, and the captains of the Grey-elves were cast into doubt anddespair, and went hither and thither purposeless. But the Dwarves held on theirway, and passed over the great bridge, and entered into Menegroth; and therebefell a thing most grievous among the sorrowful deeds of the Elder Days. Forthere was battle in the Thousand Caves, and many Elves and Dwarves wereslain; and it has not been forgotten. But the Dwarves were victorious, and thehalls of Thingol were ransacked and plundered. There fell Mablung of the HeavyHand before the doors of the treasury wherein lay the Nauglamir; and theSilmaril was taken.
At that time Beren and Luthien yet dwelt in Tol Galen, the Green Isle, in theRiver Adurant, southernmost of the streams that falling from Ered Lindonflowed down to join with Gelion; and their son Dior Eluchil had to wifeNimloth, kinswoman of Celeborn, prince of Doriath, who was wedded to theLady Galadriel. The sons of Dior and Nimloth were Elured and Elurin; and adaughter also was born to them, and she was named Elwing, which is Star-spray,for she was born on a night of stars, whose light glittered in the spray of thewaterfall of Lanthir Lamath beside her father’s house.
Now word went swiftly among the Elves of Ossiriand that a great host ofDwarves bearing gear of war had come down out of the mountains and passedover Gelion at the Ford of Stones. These tidings came soon to Beren andLuthien; and in that time also a messenger came to them out of Doriath telling ofwhat had befallen there. Then Beren arose and left Tol Galen, and summoning tohim Dior his son they went north to the River Ascar; and with them went manyof the Green-elves of Ossiriand.
Thus it came to pass that when the Dwarves of Nogrod, returning fromMenegroth with diminished host, came again to Sarn Athrad, they were assailedby unseen enemies; for as they climbed up Gelion’s banks burdened with thespoils of Doriath, suddenly all the woods were filled with the sound of elven-horns, and shafts sped upon them from every side. There very many of theDwarves were slain in the first onset; but some escaping from the ambush heldtogether, and fled eastwards towards the mountains. And as they climbed thelong slopes beneath Mount Dolmed there came forth the Shepherds of the Trees,and they drove the Dwarves into the shadowy woods of Ered Lindon: whence, itis said, came never one to climb the high passes that led to their homes.
In that battle by Sarn Athrad Beren fought his last fight, and himself slew theLord of Nogrod, and wrested from him the Necklace of the Dwarves; but hedying laid his curse upon all the treasure. Then Beren gazed in wonder on theselfsame jewel of Feanor that he had cut from Morgoth’s iron crown, now
shining set amid gold and gems by the cunning of the Dwarves; and he washed itclean of blood in the waters of the river. And when all was finished the treasureof Doriath was drowned in the River Ascar, and from that time the river wasnamed anew, Rathloriel, the Goldenbed; but Beren took the Nauglamir andreturned to Tol Galen. Little did it ease the grief of Luthien to learn that the Lordof Nogrod was slain and many Dwarves beside; but it is said and sung thatLuthien wearing that necklace and that immortal jewel was the vision of greatestbeauty and glory that has ever been outside the realm of Valinor; and for a littlewhile the Land of the Dead that Live became like a vision of the land of theValar, and no place has been since so fair, so fruitful, or so filled with light.
Now Dior Thingol’s heir bade farewell to Beren and Luthien, and departingfrom Lanthir Lamath with Nimloth his wife he came to Menegroth, and abodethere; and with them went their young sons Elured and Elurin, and Elwing theirdaughter. Then the Sindar received them with joy, and they arose from thedarkness of their grief for fallen kin and King and for the departure of Melian;and Dior Eluchil set himself to raise anew the glory of the kingdom of Doriath.
There came a night of autumn, and when it grew late, one came and smoteupon the doors of Menegroth, demanding admittance to the King. He was a lordof the Green-elves hastening from Ossiriand, and the door-wards brought him towhere Dior sat alone in his chamber; and there in silence he gave to the King acoffer, and took his leave. But in that coffer lay the Necklace of the Dwarves,wherein was set the Silmaril; and Dior looking upon it knew it for a sign thatBeren Erchamion and Luthien Tinuviel had died indeed, and gone where go therace of Men to a fate beyond the world.
Long did Dior gaze upon the Silmaril, which his father and mother hadbrought beyond hope out of the terror of Morgoth; and his grief was great thatdeath had come upon them so soon. But the wise have said that the Silmarilhastened their end; for the flame of the beauty of Luthien as she wore it was toobright for mortal lands.
Then Dior arose, and about his neck he clasped the Nauglamir; and now heappeared as the fairest of all the children of the world, of threefold race: of theEdain, and of the Eldar, and of the Maiar of the Blessed Realm.
But now the rumour ran among the scattered Elves of Beleriand that DiorThingol’s heir wore the Nauglamir, and they said: 'A Silmaril of Feanor burnsagain in the woods of Doriath’; and the oath of the sons of Feanor was waked
again from sleep. For while Luthien wore the Necklace of the Dwarves no Elfwould dare to assail her; but now hearing of the renewal of Doriath and of Dior’spride the seven gathered again from wandering, and they sent to him to claimtheir own.
But Dior returned no answer to the sons of Feanor; and Celegorm stirred uphis brothers to prepare an assault upon Doriath. They came at unawares in themiddle of winter, and fought with Dior in the Thousand Caves; and so befell thesecond slaying of Elf by Elf. There fell Celegorm by Dior’s hand, and there fellCurufin, and dark Caranthir; but Dior was slain also, and Nimloth his wife, andthe cruel servants of Celegorm seized his young sons and left them to starve inthe forest. Of this Maedhros indeed repented, and sought for them long in thewoods of Doriath; but his search was unavailing, and of the fate of Elured andElurin no tale tells.
Thus Doriath was destroyed, and never rose again. But the sons of Feanorgained not what they sought; for a remnant of the people fled before them, andwith them was Elwing Dior’s daughter, and they escaped, and bearing with themthe Silmaril they came in time to the mouths of the River Sirion by the sea.
CHAPTER 23
OF TUQR AND THE FALL OF GONDOLIN
It has been told that Huor the brother of Hurin was slain in the Battle ofUnnumbered Tears; and in the winter of that year Rian his wife bore a child inthe wilds of Mithrim, and he was named Tuor, and was taken to foster by Annaelof the Grey-elves, who yet lived in those hills. Now when Tuor was sixteenyears old the Elves were minded to leave the caves of Androth where they dwelt,and to make their way secretly to the Havens of Sirion in the distant south; butthey were assailed by Ores and Easterlings before they made good their escape,and Tuor was taken captive and enslaved by Lorgan, chief of the Easterlings ofHithlum. For three years he endured that thraldom, but at the end of that time heescaped; and returning to the caves of Androth he dwelt there alone, and didsuch great hurt to the Easterlings that Lorgan set a price upon his head.
But when Tuor had lived thus in solitude as an outlaw for four years, Ulmo setit in his heart to depart from the land of his fathers, for he had chosen Tuor as theinstrument of his designs; and leaving once more the caves of Androth he wentwestwards across Dor-lomin, and found Annon-in-Gelydh, the Gate of theNoldor, which the people of Turgon built when they dwelt in Nevrast long yearsbefore. Thence a dark tunnel led beneath the mountains, and issued into CirithNinniach, the Rainbow Cleft, through which a turbulent water ran towards thewestern sea. Thus it was that Tuor’s flight from Hithlum was marked by neitherMan nor Ore, and no knowledge of it came to the ears of Morgoth.
And Tuor came into Nevrast, and looking upon Belegaer the Great Sea he wasenamoured of it, and the sound of it and the longing for it were ever in his heartand ear, and an unquiet was on him that took him at last into the depths of therealms of Ulmo. Then he dwelt in Nevrast alone, and the summer of that yearpassed, and the doom of Nargothrond drew near; but when the autumn came hesaw seven great swans flying south, and he knew them for a sign that he hadtarried overlong, and he followed their flight along the shores of the sea. Thus hecame at length to the deserted halls of Vinyamar beneath Mount Taras, and heentered in, and found there the shield and hauberk, and the sword and helm, thatTurgon had left there by the command of Ulmo long before; and he arrayedhimself in those arms, and went down to the shore. But there came a great stormout of the west, and out of that storm Ulmo the Lord of Waters arose in majestyand spoke to Tuor as he stood beside the sea. And Ulmo bade him depart fromthat place and seek out the hidden kingdom of Gondolin; and he gave Tuor agreat cloak, to mantle him in shadow from the eyes of his enemies.
But in the morning when the storm was passed, Tuor came upon an Elf
standing beside the walls of Vinyamar; and he was Voronwe, son of Aranwe, ofGondolin, who sailed in the last ship that Turgon sent into the West. But whenthat ship returning at last out of the deep ocean foundered in the great stormwithin sight of the coasts of Middle-earth, Ulmo took him up, alone of all itsmariners, and cast him onto the land near Vinyamar; and learning of thecommand laid upon Tuor by the Lord of Waters Voronwe was filled withwonder, and did not refuse him his guidance to the hidden door of Gondolin.Therefore they set out together from that place, and as the Fell Winter of thatyear came down upon them out of the north they went warily eastward under theeaves of the Mountains of Shadow.
At length they came in their journeying to the Pools of Ivrin, and looked withgrief on the defilement wrought there by the passage of Glaurung the Dragon;but even as they gazed upon it they saw one going northward in haste, and hewas a tall Man, clad in black, and bearing a black sword. But they knew not whohe was, nor anything of what had befallen in the south; and he passed them by,and they said no word.
And at the last by the power that Ulmo set upon them they came to the hiddendoor of Gondolin, and passing down the tunnel they reached the inner gate, andwere taken by the guard as prisoners. Then they were led up the mighty ravine ofOrfalch Echor, barred by seven gates, and brought before Ecthelion of theFountain, the warden of the great gate at the end of the climbing road; and thereTuor cast aside his cloak, and from the arms that he bore from Vinyamar it wasseen that he was in truth one sent by Ulmo. Then Tuor looked down upon thefair vale of Tumladen, set as a green jewel amid the encircling hills; and he sawfar off upon the rocky height of Amon Gwareth Gondolin the great, city of sevennames, whose fame and glory is mightiest in song of all dwellings of the Elves inthe Hither Lands. At the bidding of Ecthelion trumpets were blown on the towersof the great gate, and they echoed in the hills; and far off but clear there came asound of answering trumpets blown upon the white walls of the city, flushedwith the rose of dawn upon the plain.
Thus it was that the son of Huor rode across Tumladen, and came to the gateof Gondolin; and passing up the wide stairways of the city he was brought at lastto the Tower of the King, and looked upon the images of the Trees of Valinor.Then Tuor stood before Turgon son of Fingolfin, High King of the Noldor, andupon the King’s right hand there stood Maeglin his sister-son, but upon his lefthand sat Idril Celebrindal his daughter; and all that heard the voice of Tuormarvelled, doubting that this were in truth a Man of mortal race, for his wordswere the words of the Lord of Waters that came to him in that hour. And he gavewarning to Turgon that the Curse of Mandos now hastened to its fulfilment,
when all the works of the Noldor should perish; and he bade him depart, andabandon the fair and mighty city that he had built, and go down Sirion to the sea.
Then Turgon pondered long the counsel of Ulmo, and there came into hismind the words that were spoken to him in Vinyamar: 'Love not too well thework of thy hands and the devices of thy heart; and remember that the true hopeof the Noldor lieth in the West, and cometh from the Sea.’ But Turgon wasbecome proud, and Gondolin as beautiful as a memory of Elven Tirion, and hetrusted still in its secret and impregnable strength, though even a Vala shouldgainsay it; and after the Nirnaeth Arnoediad the people of that city desired neveragain to mingle in the woes of Elves and Men without, nor to return throughdread and danger into the West. Shut behind their pathless and enchanted hillsthey suffered none to enter, though he fled from Morgoth hate-pursued; andtidings of the lands beyond came to them faint and far, and they heeded themlittle. The spies of Angband sought for them in vain; and their dwelling was as arumour, and a secret that none could find. Maeglin spoke ever against Tuor inthe councils of the King, and his words seemed the more weighty in that theywent with Turgon’s heart; and at the last he rejected the bidding of Ulmo andrefused his counsel. But in the warning of the Vala he heard again the words thatwere spoken before the departing Noldor on the coast of Araman long ago; andthe fear of treason was wakened in Turgon’s heart. Therefore in that time thevery entrance to the hidden door in the Encircling Mountains was caused to beblocked up; and thereafter none went ever forth from Gondolin on any errand ofpeace or war, while that city stood. Tidings were brought by Thorondor Lord ofEagles of the fall of Nargothrond, and after of the slaying of Thingol and of Diorhis heir, and of the ruin of Doriath; but Turgon shut his ear to word of the woeswithout, and vowed to march never at the side of any son of Feanor; and hispeople he forbade ever to pass the leaguer of the hills.
And Tuor remained in Gondolin, for its bliss and its beauty and the wisdom ofits people held him enthralled; and he became mighty in stature and in mind, andlearned deeply of the lore of the exiled Elves. Then the heart of Idril was turnedto him, and his to her; and Maeglin’s secret hatred grew ever greater, for hedesired above all things to possess her, the only heir of the King of Gondolin.But so high did Tuor stand in the favour of the King that when he had dweltthere for seven years Turgon did not refuse him even the hand of his daughter;for though he would not heed the bidding of Ulmo, he perceived that the fate ofthe Noldor was wound with the one whom Ulmo had sent; and he did not forgetthe words that Huor spoke to him before the host of Gondolin departed from theBattle of Unnumbered Tears.
Then there was made a great and joyful feast, for Tuor had won the hearts of
all that people, save only of Maeglin and his secret following; and thus therecame to pass the second union of Elves and Men.
In the spring of the year after was born in Gondolin Earendil Halfelven, theson of Tuor and Idril Celebrindal; and that was five hundred years and threesince the coming of the Noldor to Middle-earth. Of surpassing beauty wasEarendil, for a light was in his face as the light of heaven, and he had the beautyand the wisdom of the Eldar and the strength and hardihood of the Men of old;and the Sea spoke ever in his ear and heart, even as with Tuor his father.
Then the days of Gondolin were yet full of joy and peace; and none knew thatthe region wherein the Hidden Kingdom lay had been at last revealed to Morgothby the cries of Hurin, when standing in the wilderness beyond the EncirclingMountains and finding no entrance he called on Turgon in despair. Thereafter thethought of Morgoth was bent unceasing on the mountainous land between Anachand the upper waters of Sirion, whither his servants had never passed; yet still nospy or creature out of Angband could come there because of the vigilance of theeagles, and Morgoth was thwarted in the fulfilment of his designs. But IdrilCelebrindal was wise and far-seeing, and her heart misgave her, and forebodingcrept upon her spirit as a cloud. Therefore in that time she let prepare a secretway, that should lead down from the city and passing out beneath the surface ofthe plain issue far beyond the walls, northward of Amon Gwareth; and shecontrived it that the work was known but to few, and no whisper of it came toMaeglin’s ears.
Now on a time, when Earendil was yet young, Maeglin was lost. For he, ashas been told, loved mining and quarrying after metals above all other craft; andhe was master and leader of the Elves who worked in the mountains distant fromthe city, seeking after metals for their smithying of things both of peace and war.But often Maeglin went with few of his folk beyond the leaguer of the hills, andthe King knew not that his bidding was defied; and thus it came to pass, as fatewilled, that Maeglin was taken prisoner by Ores, and brought to Angband.Maeglin was no weakling or craven, but the torment wherewith he wasthreatened cowed his spirit, and he purchased his life and freedom by revealingto Morgoth the very place of Gondolin and the ways whereby it might be foundand assailed. Great indeed was the joy of Morgoth, and to Maeglin he promisedthe lordship of Gondolin as his vassal, and the possession of Idril Celebrindal,when the city should be taken; and indeed desire for Idril and hatred for Tuor ledMaeglin the easier to his treachery, most infamous in all the histories of the ElderDays. But Morgoth sent him back to Gondolin, lest any should suspect thebetrayal, and so that Maeglin should aid the assault from within, when the hour
came; and he abode in the halls of the King with smiling face and evil in hisheart, while the darkness gathered ever deeper upon Idril.
At last, in the year when Earendil was seven years old, Morgoth was ready,and he loosed upon Gondolin his Balrogs, and his Ores, and his wolves; and withthem came dragons of the brood of Glaurung, and they were become now manyand terrible. The host of Morgoth came over the northern hills where the heightwas greatest and the watch least vigilant, and it came at night upon a time offestival, when all the people of Gondolin were upon the walls to await the risingsun, and sing their songs at its uplifting; for the morrow was the great feast thatthey named the Gates of Summer. But the red light mounted the hills in the northand not in the east; and there was no stay in the advance of the foe until theywere beneath the very walls of Gondolin, and the city was beleaguered withouthope. Of the deeds of desperate valour there done, by the chieftains of the noblehouses and their warriors, and not least by Tuor, much is told in The Fall ofGondolin : of the battle of Ecthelion of the Fountain with Gothmog Lord ofBalrogs in the very square of the King, where each slew the other, and of thedefence of the tower of Turgon by the people of his household, until the towerwas overthrown; and mighty was its fall and the fall of Turgon in its ruin.
Tuor sought to rescue Idril from the sack of the city, but Maeglin had laidhands on her, and on Earendil; and Tuor fought with Maeglin on the walls, andcast him far out, and his body as it fell smote the rocky slopes of Amon Gwareththrice ere it pitched into the flames below. Then Tuor and Idril led such remnantsof the people of Gondolin as they could gather in the confusion of the burningdown the secret way which Idril had prepared; and of that passage the captainsof Angband knew nothing, and thought not that any fugitives would take a pathtowards the north and the highest parts of the mountains and the nighest toAngband. The fume of the burning, and the steam of the fair fountains ofGondolin withering in the flame of the dragons of the north, fell upon the vale ofTumladen in mournful mists; and thus was the escape of Tuor and his companyaided, for there was still a long and open road to follow from the tunnel’s mouthto the foothills of the mountains. Nonetheless they came thither, and beyondhope they climbed, in woe and misery, for the high places were cold and terrible,and they had among them many that were wounded, and women and children.
There was a dreadful pass, Cirith Thoronath it was named, the Eagles’ Cleft,where beneath the shadow of the highest peaks a narrow path wound its way; onthe right hand it was walled by a precipice, and on the left a dreadful fall leaptinto emptiness. Along that narrow way their march was strung, when they wereambushed by Ores, for Morgoth had set watchers all about the encircling hills;and a Balrog was with them. Then dreadful was their plight, and hardly wouldthey have been saved by the valour of yellow-haired Glorfindel, chief of theHouse of the Golden Flower of Gondolin, had not Thorondor come timely totheir aid.
Many are the songs that have been sung of the duel of Glorfindel with theBalrog upon a pinnacle of rock in that high place; and both fell to ruin in theabyss. But the eagles coming stooped upon the Ores, and drove them shriekingback; and all were slain or cast into the deeps, so that rumour of the escape fromGondolin came not until long after to Morgoth’s ears. Then Thorondor bore upGlorfindel’s body out of the abyss, and they buried him in a mound of stonesbeside the pass; and a green turf came there, and yellow flowers bloomed upon itamid the barrenness of stone, until the world was changed.
Thus led by Tuor son of Huor the remnant of Gondolin passed over themountains, and came down into the Vale of Sirion; and fleeing southward byweary and dangerous marches they came at length to Nan-tathren, the Land ofWillows, for the power of Ulmo yet ran in the great river, and it was about them.There they rested a while, and were healed of their hurts and weariness; but theirsorrow could not be healed. And they made a feast in memory of Gondolin andof the Elves that had perished there, the maidens, and the wives, and the warriorsof the King; and for Glorfindel the beloved many were the songs they sang,under the willows of Nan-tathren in the waning of the year. There Tuor made asong for Earendil his son, concerning the coming of Ulmo the Lord of Waters tothe shores of Nevrast aforetime; and the sea-longing woke in his heart, and in hisson’s also. Therefore Idril and Tuor departed from Nan-tathren, and wentsouthwards down the river to the sea; and they dwelt there by the mouths ofSirion, and joined their people to the company of Elwing Dior’s daughter, thathad fled thither but a little while before. And when the tidings came to Balar ofthe fall of Gondolin and the death of Turgon, Ereinion Gil-galad son of Fingonwas named High King of the Noldor in Middle-earth.
But Morgoth thought that his triumph was fulfilled, recking little of the sonsof Feanor, and of their oath, which had harmed him never and turned always tohis mightiest aid; and in his black thought he laughed, regretting not the one
Silmaril that he had lost, for by it as he deemed the last shred of the people of theEldar should vanish from Middle-earth and trouble it no more. If he knew of thedwelling by the waters of Sirion, he gave no sign, biding his time, and waitingupon the working of oath and lie. Yet by Sirion and the sea there grew up anElven-folk, the gleanings of Doriath and Gondolin; and from Balar the marinersof Cirdan came among them, and they took to the waves and the building ofships, dwelling ever nigh to the coasts of Arvernien, under the shadow of Ulmo’shand.
And it is said that in that time Ulmo came to Valinor out of the deep waters,and spoke there to the Valar of the need of the Elves; and he called on them toforgive them, and rescue them from the overmastering might of Morgoth, andwin back the Silmarils, wherein alone now bloomed the light of the Days ofBliss when the Two Trees still shone in Valinor. But Manwe moved not; and ofthe counsels of his heart what tale shall tell? The wise have said that the hourwas not yet come, and that only one speaking in person for the cause of bothElves and Men, pleading for pardon on their mis-deeds and pity on their woes,might move the counsels of the Powers; and the oath of Feanor perhaps evenManwe could not loose, until it found its end, and the sons of Feanorrelinquished the Silmarils, upon which they had laid their ruthless claim. For thelight which lit the Silmarils the Valar themselves had made.
In those days Tuor felt old age creep upon him, and ever a longing for thedeeps of the Sea grew stronger in his heart. Therefore he built a great ship, andhe named it Earrame, which is Sea-Wing; and with Idril Celebrindal he set sailinto the sunset and the West, and came no more into any tale or song. But in afterdays it was sung that Tuor alone of mortal Men was numbered among the elderrace, and was joined with the Noldor, whom he loved; and his fate is sunderedfrom the fate of Men.
CHAPTER 24
OF THE VOYAGE OF EARENDIL AND THE WAR OF
WRATH
Bright Earendil was then lord of the people that dwelt nigh to Sirion’s mouths;and he took to wife Elwing the fair, and she bore to him Elrond and Elros, whoare called the Half-elven. Yet Earendil could not rest, and his voyages about theshores of the Hither Lands eased not his unquiet. Two purposes grew in hisheart, blended as one in longing for the wide Sea: he sought to sail thereon,seeking after Tuor and Idril who returned not; and he thought to find perhaps thelast shore, and bring ere he died the message of Elves and Men to the Valar inthe West, that should move their hearts to pity for the sorrows of Middle-earth.
Now Earendil became fast in friendship with Cirdan the Shipwright, whodwelt on the Isle of Balar with those of his people who escaped from the sack ofthe Havens of Brithombar and Eglarest. With the aid of Cirdan Earendil builtVingilot, the Foam-flower, fairest of the ships of song; golden were its oars andwhite its timbers, hewn in the birchwoods of Nimbrethil, and its sails were as theargent moon. In the Lay of Earendil is many a thing sung of his adventures in thedeep and in lands untrodden, and in many seas and in many isles; but Elwingwas not with him, and she sat in sorrow by the mouths of Sirion.
Earendil found not Tuor nor Idril, nor came he ever on that journey to theshores of Valinor, defeated by shadows and enchantment, driven by repellingwinds, until in longing for Elwing he turned homeward towards the coast ofBeleriand. And his heart bade him haste, for a sudden fear had fallen on him outof dreams; and the winds that before he had striven with might not now bear himback as swift as his desire.
Now when first the tidings came to Maedhros that Elwing yet lived, and dweltin possession of the Silmaril by the mouths of Sirion, he repenting of the deedsin Doriath withheld his hand. But in time the knowledge of their oath unfulfilledreturned to torment him and his brothers, and gathering from their wanderinghunting-paths they sent messages to the Havens of friendship and yet of sterndemand. Then Elwing and the people of Sirion would not yield the jewel whichBeren had won and Luthien had worn, and for which Dior the fair was slain; andleast of all while Earendil their lord was on the sea, for it seemed to them that inthe Silmaril lay the healing and the blessing that had come upon their houses andtheir ships. And so there came to pass the last and cruellest of the slayings of Elfby Elf; and that was the third of the great wrongs achieved by the accursed oath.
For the sons of Feanor that yet lived came down suddenly upon the exiles ofGondolin and the remnant of Doriath, and destroyed them. In that battle some of
their people stood aside, and some few rebelled and were slain upon the otherpart aiding Elwing against their own lords (for such was the sorrow andconfusion in the hearts of the Eldar in those days); but Maedhros and Maglorwon the day, though they alone remained thereafter of the sons of Feanor, forboth Amrod and Amras were slain. Too late the ships of Cirdan and Gil-galadthe High King came hasting to the aid of the Elves of Sirion; and Elwing wasgone, and her sons. Then such few of that people as did not perish in the assaultjoined themselves to Gil-galad, and went with him to Balar; and they told thatElros and Elrond were taken captive, but Elwing with the Silmaril upon herbreast had cast herself into the sea.
Thus Maedhros and Maglor gained not the jewel; but it was not lost. ForUlmo bore up Elwing out of the waves, and he gave her the likeness of a greatwhite bird, and upon her breast there shone as a star the Silmaril, as she flewover the water to seek Earendil her beloved. On a time of night Earendil at thehelm of his ship saw her come towards him, as a white cloud exceeding swiftbeneath the moon, as a star over the sea moving in strange course, a pale flameon wings of storm. And it is sung that she fell from the air upon the timbers ofVingilot, in a swoon, nigh unto death for the urgency of her speed, and Earendiltook her to his bosom; but in the morning with marvelling eyes he beheld hiswife in her own form beside him with her hair upon his face, and she slept.
Great was the sorrow of Earendil and Elwing for the ruin of the havens ofSirion, and the captivity of their sons, and they feared that they would be slain;but it was not so. For Maglor took pity upon Elros and Elrond, and he cherishedthem, and love grew after between them, as little might be thought; but Maglor’sheart was sick and weary with the burden of the dreadful oath.
Yet Earendil saw now no hope left in the lands of Middle-earth, and he turnedagain in despair and came not home, but sought back once more to Valinor withElwing at his side. He stood now most often at the prow of Vingilot, and theSilmaril was bound upon his brow; and ever its light grew greater as they drewinto the West. And the wise have said that it was by reason of the power of thatholy jewel that they came in time to waters that no vessels save those of theTeleri had known; and they came to the Enchanted Isles and escaped theirenchantment; and they came into the Shadowy Seas and passed their shadows,and they looked upon Tol Eressea the Lonely Isle, but tarried not; and at the lastthey cast anchor in the Bay of Eldamar, and the Teleri saw the coming of thatship out of the East and they were amazed, gazing from afar upon the light of theSilmaril, and it was very great. Then Earendil, first of living Men, landed on theimmortal shores; and he spoke there to Elwing and to those that were with him,and they were three mariners who had sailed all the seas beside him: Falathar,
Erellont, and Aerandir were their names. And Earendil said to them: ‘Here nonebut myself shall set foot, lest you fall under the wrath of the Valar. But that perilI will take on myself alone, for the sake of the Two Kindreds.’
But Elwing answered: ‘Then would our paths be sundered for ever; but all thyperils I will take on myself also.’ And she leaped into the white foam and rantowards him; but Earendil was sorrowful, for he feared the anger of the Lords ofthe West upon any of Middle-earth that should dare to pass the leaguer of Aman.And there they bade farewell to the companions of their voyage, and were takenfrom them for ever.
Then Earendil said to Elwing: ‘Await me here; for one only may bring themessage that it is my fate to bear.’ And he went up alone into the land, and cameinto the Calacirya, and it seemed to him empty and silent; for even as Morgothand Ungoliant came in ages past, so now Earendil had come at a time of festival,and wellnigh all the Elvenfolk were gone to Valimar, or were gathered in thehalls of Manwe upon Taniquetil, and few were left to keep watch upon the wallsof Tirion.
But some there were who saw him from afar, and the great light that he bore;and they went in haste to Valimar. But Earendil climbed the green hill of Tunaand found it bare; and he entered into the streets of Tirion, and they were empty;and his heart was heavy, for he feared that some evil had come even to theBlessed Realm. He walked in the deserted ways of Tirion, and the dust upon hisraiment and his shoes was a dust of diamonds, and he shone and glistened as heclimbed the long white stairs. And he called aloud in many tongues, both ofElves and Men, but there were none to answer him. Therefore he turned back atlast towards the sea; but even as he took the shoreward road one stood upon thehill and called to him in a great voice, crying:
‘Hail Earendil, of mariners most renowned, the looked for that cometh atunawares, the longed for that cometh beyond hope! Hail Earendil, bearer of lightbefore the Sun and Moon! Splendour of the Children of Earth, star in thedarkness, jewel in the sunset, radiant in the morning!’
That voice was the voice of Eonwe, herald of Manwe, and he came fromValimar, and summoned Earendil to come before the Powers of Arda. AndEarendil went into Valinor and to the halls of Valimar, and never again set footupon the lands of Men. Then the Valar took counsel together, and theysummoned Ulmo from the deeps of the sea; and Earendil stood before theirfaces, and delivered the errand of the Two Kindreds. Pardon he asked for theNoldor and pity for their great sorrows, and mercy upon Men and Elves andsuccour in their need. And his prayer was granted.
It is told among the Elves that after Earendil had departed, seeking Elwing his
wife, Mandos spoke concerning his fate; and he said: ‘Shall mortal Man stepliving upon the undying lands, and yet live?’ But Ulmo said: ‘For this he wasborn into the world. And say unto me: whether is he Earendil Tuor’s son of theline of Hador, or the son of Idril, Turgon’s daughter, of the Elven-house ofFinwe?’ And Mandos answered: ‘Equally the Noldor, who went wilfully intoexile, may not return hither.’
But when all was spoken, Manwe gave judgement, and he said: ‘In this matterthe power of doom is given to me. The peril that he ventured for love of the TwoKindreds shall not fall upon Earendil, nor shall it fall upon Elwing his wife, whoentered into peril for love of him; but they shall not walk again ever amongElves or Men in the Outer Lands. And this is my decree concerning them: toEarendil and to Elwing, and to their sons, shall be given leave each to choosefreely to which kindred their fates shall be joined, and under which kindred theyshall be judged.’
Now when Earendil was long time gone Elwing became lonely and afraid; andwandering by the margin of the sea she came near to Alqualonde, where lay theTelerin fleets. There the Teleri befriended her, and they listened to her tales ofDoriath and Gondolin and the griefs of Beleriand, and they were filled with pityand wonder; and there Earendil returning found her, at the Haven of the Swans.But ere long they were summoned to Valimar; and there the decree of the ElderKing was declared to them.
Then Earendil said to Elwing: ‘Choose thou, for now I am weary of theworld.’ And Elwing chose to be judged among the Firstborn Children of Iluvatar,because of Luthien; and for her sake Earendil chose alike, though his heart wasrather with the kindred of Men and the people of his father. Then at the biddingof the Valar Eonwe went to the shore of Aman, where the companions ofEarendil still remained, awaiting tidings; and he took a boat, and the threemariners were set therein, and the Valar drove them away into the East with agreat wind. But they took Vingilot, and hallowed it, and bore it away throughValinor to the uttermost rim of the world; and there it passed through the Door ofNight and was lifted up even into the oceans of heaven.
Now fair and marvellous was that vessel made, and it was filled with awavering flame, pure and bright; and Earendil the Mariner sat at the helm,glistening with dust of elven-gems, and the Silmaril was bound upon his brow.Far he journeyed in that ship, even into the starless voids; but most often was heseen at morning or at evening, glimmering in sunrise or sunset, as he came backto Valinor from voyages beyond the confines of the world.
On those journeys Elwing did not go, for she might not endure the cold andthe pathless voids, and she loved rather the earth and the sweet winds that blow
on sea and hill. Therefore there was built for her a white tower northward uponthe borders of the Sundering Seas; and thither at times all the sea-birds of theearth repaired. And it is said that Elwing learned the tongues of birds, whoherself had once worn their shape; and they taught her the craft of flight, and herwings were of white and silver-grey. And at times, when Earendil returning drewnear again to Arda, she would fly to meet him, even as she had flown long ago,when she was rescued from the sea. Then the far-sighted among the Elves thatdwelt in the Lonely Isle would see her like a white bird, shining, rose-stained inthe sunset, as she soared in joy to greet the coming of Vingilot to haven.
Now when first Vingilot was set to sail in the seas of heaven, it rose unlookedfor, glittering and bright; and the people of Middle-earth beheld it from afar andwondered, and they took it for a sign, and called it Gil-Estel, the Star of HighHope. And when this new star was seen at evening, Maedhros spoke to Maglorhis brother, and he said: 'Surely that is a Silmaril that shines now in the West ? 5
And Maglor answered: ‘If it be truly the Silmaril which we saw cast into thesea that rises again by the power of the Valar, then let us be glad; for its glory isseen now by many, and is yet secure from all evil.’ Then the Elves looked up,and despaired no longer; but Morgoth was filled with doubt.
Yet it is said that Morgoth looked not for the assault that came upon him fromthe West; for so great was his pride become that he deemed that none would everagain come with open war against him. Moreover he thought that he had for everestranged the Noldor from the Lords of the West, and that content in theirblissful realm the Valar would heed no more his kingdom in the world without;for to him that is pitiless the deeds of pity are ever strange and beyondreckoning. But the host of the Valar prepared for battle; and beneath their whitebanners marched the Vanyar, the people of Ingwe, and those also of the Noldorwho never departed from Valinor, whose leader was Finarfin the son of Finwe.Few of the Teleri were willing to go forth to war, for they remembered theslaying at the Swanhaven, and the rape of their ships; but they hearkened toElwing, who was the daughter of Dior Eluchil and come of their own kindred,and they sent mariners enough to sail the ships that bore the host of Valinor eastover the sea. Yet they stayed aboard their vessels, and none of them set foot uponthe Hither Lands.
Of the march of the host of the Valar to the north of Middle-earth little is saidin any tale; for among them went none of those Elves who had dwelt andsuffered in the Hither Lands, and who made the histories of those days that stillare known; and tidings of these things they only learned long afterwards from
their kinsfolk in Aman. But at the last the might of Valinor came up out of theWest, and the challenge of the trumpets of Eonwe filled the sky; and Beleriandwas ablaze with the glory of their arms, for the host of the Valar were arrayed informs young and fair and terrible, and the mountains rang beneath their feet.
The meeting of the hosts of the West and of the North is named the GreatBattle, and the War of Wrath. There was marshalled the whole power of theThrone of Morgoth, and it had become great beyond count, so that Anfauglithcould not contain it; and all the North was aflame with war.
But it availed him not. The Balrogs were destroyed, save some few that fledand hid themselves in caverns inaccessible at the roots of the earth; and theuncounted legions of the Ores perished like straw in a great fire, or were sweptlike shrivelled leaves before a burning wind. Few remained to trouble the worldfor long years after. And such few as were left of the three houses of the Elf-friends, Fathers of Men, fought upon the part of the Valar; and they wereavenged in those days for Baragund and Barahir, Galdor and Gundor, Huor andHurin, and many others of their lords. But a great part of the sons of Men,whether of the people of Uldor or others new-come out of the east, marched withthe Enemy; and the Elves do not forget it.
Then, seeing that his hosts were overthrown and his power dispersed, Morgothquailed, and he dared not to come forth himself. But he loosed upon his foes thelast desperate assault that he had prepared, and out of the pits of Angband thereissued the winged dragons, that had not before been seen; and so sudden andminous was the onset of that dreadful fleet that the host of the Valar was drivenback, for the coming of the dragons was with great thunder, and lightning, and atempest of fire.
But Earendil came, shining with white flame, and about Vingilot weregathered all the great birds of heaven and Thorondor was their captain, and therewas battle in the air all the day and through a dark night of doubt. Before therising of the sun Earendil slew Ancalagon the Black, the mightiest of the dragon-host, and cast him from the sky; and he fell upon the towers of Thangorodrim,and they were broken in his ruin. Then the sun rose, and the host of the Valarprevailed, and well-nigh all the dragons were destroyed; and all the pits ofMorgoth were broken and unroofed, and the might of the Valar descended intothe deeps of the earth. There Morgoth stood at last at bay, and yet unvaliant. Hefled into the deepest of his mines, and sued for peace and pardon; but his feetwere hewn from under him, and he was hurled upon his face. Then he wasbound with the chain Angainor which he had worn aforetime, and his iron crownthey beat into a collar for his neck, and his head was bowed upon his knees. Andthe two Silmarils which remained to Morgoth were taken from his crown, and
they shone unsul-lied beneath the sky; and Eonwe took them, and guarded them.
Thus an end was made of the power of Angband in the North, and the evilrealm was brought to naught; and out of the deep prisons a multitude of slavescame forth beyond all hope into the light of day, and they looked upon a worldthat was changed. For so great was the fury of those adversaries that the northernregions of the western world were rent asunder, and the sea roared in throughmany chasms, and there was confusion and great noise; and rivers perished orfound new paths, and the valleys were upheaved and the hills trod down; andSirion was no more.
Then Eonwe as herald of the Elder King summoned the Elves of Beleriand todepart from Middle-earth. But Maedhros and Maglor would not hearken, andthey prepared, though now with weariness and loathing, to attempt in despair thefulfilment of their oath; for they would have given battle for the Silmarils, werethey withheld, even against the victorious host of Valinor, even though theystood alone against all the world. And they sent a message therefore to Eonwe,bidding him yield up now those jewels which of old Feanor their father madeand Morgoth stole from him.
But Eonwe answered that the right to the work of their father, which the sonsof Feanor formerly possessed, had now perished, because of their many andmerciless deeds, being blinded by their oath, and most of all because of theirslaying of Dior and the assault upon the Havens. The light of the Silmarilsshould go now into the West, whence it came in the beginning; and to Valinormust Maedhros and Maglor return, and there abide the judgement of the Valar,by whose decree alone would Eonwe yield the jewels from his charge. ThenMaglor desired indeed to submit, for his heart was sorrowful, and he said: Theoath says not that we may not bide our time, and it may be that in Valinor allshall be forgiven and forgot, and we shall come into our own in peace.’
But Maedhros answered that if they returned to Aman but the favour of theValar were withheld from them, then their oath would still remain, but itsfulfilment be beyond all hope; and he said: ‘Who can tell to what dreadful doomwe shall come, if we disobey the Powers in their own land, or purpose ever tobring war again into their holy realm?’
Yet Maglor still held back, saying: ‘If Manwe and Varda themselves deny thefulfilment of an oath to which we named them in witness, is it not made void?’
And Maedhros answered: ‘But how shall our voices reach to Iluvatar beyondthe Circles of the World? And by Iluvatar we swore in our madness, and calledthe Everlasting Darkness upon us, if we kept not our word. Who shall releaseus?’
‘If none can release us,’ said Maglor, ‘then indeed the Everlasting Darkness
shall be our lot, whether we keep our oath or break it; but less evil shall we do inthe breaking.’
Yet he yielded at last to the will of Maedhros, and they took counsel togetherhow they should lay hands on the Silmarils. And they disguised themselves, andcame in the night to the camp of Eonwe, and crept into the place where theSilmarils were guarded; and they slew the guards, and laid hands on the jewels.Then all the camp was raised against them, and they prepared to die, defendingthemselves until the last. But Eonwe would not permit the slaying of the sons ofFeanor; and departing unfought they fled far away. Each of them took to himselfa Silmaril, for they said: ‘Since one is lost to us, and but two remain, and we twoalone of our brothers, so is it plain that fate would have us share the heirlooms ofour father.’
But the jewel burned the hand of Maedhros in pain unbearable; and heperceived that it was as Eonwe had said, and that his right thereto had becomevoid, and that the oath was vain. And being in anguish and despair he casthimself into a gaping chasm filled with fire, and so ended; and the Silmaril thathe bore was taken into the bosom of the Earth.
And it is told of Maglor that he could not endure the pain with which theSilmaril tormented him; and he cast it at last into the Sea, and thereafter hewandered ever upon the shores, singing in pain and regret beside the waves. ForMaglor was mighty among the singers of old, named only after Daeron ofDoriath; but he came never back among the people of the Elves. And thus itcame to pass that the Silmarils found their long homes: one in the airs of heaven,and one in the fires of the heart of the world, and one in the deep waters.
In those days there was a great building of ships upon the shores of theWestern Sea; and thence in many a fleet the Eldar set sail into the West, andcame never back to the lands of weeping and of war. And the Vanyar returnedbeneath their white banners, and were borne in triumph to Valinor; but their joyin victory was diminished, for they returned without the Silmarils fromMorgoth’s crown, and they knew that those jewels could not be found or broughttogether again unless the world be broken and remade.
And when they came into the West the Elves of Beleriand dwelt upon TolEressea, the Lonely Isle, that looks both west and east; whence they might comeeven to Valinor. They were admitted again to the love of Manwe and the pardonof the Valar; and the Teleri forgave their ancient grief, and the curse was laid torest.
Yet not all the Eldalie were willing to forsake the Hither Lands where they had
long suffered and long dwelt; and some lingered many an age in Middle-earth.Among those were Cardan the Shipwright, and Celeborn of Doriath, withGaladriel his wife, who alone remained of those who led the Noldor to exile inBeleriand. In Middle-earth dwelt also Gil-galad the High King, and with himwas Elrond Half-elven, who chose, as was granted to him, to be numberedamong the Eldar; but Elros his brother chose to abide with Men. And from thesebrethren alone has come among Men the blood of the Firstborn and a strain ofthe spirits divine that were before Arda; for they were the sons of Elwing, Dior’sdaughter, Luthien’s son, child of Thingol and Melian; and Earendil their fatherwas the son of Idril Celebrindal, Turgon’s daughter of Gondolin.
But Morgoth himself the Valar thrust through the Door of Night beyond theWalls of the World, into the Timeless Void; and a guard is set for ever on thosewalls, and Earendil keeps watch upon the ramparts of the sky. Yet the lies thatMelkor, the mighty and accursed, Morgoth Bauglir, the Power of Terror and ofHate, sowed in the hearts of Elves and Men are a seed that does not die andcannot be destroyed; and ever and anon it sprouts anew, and will bear dark fruiteven unto the latest days.
Here ends the SILMARILLION. If it has passed from the high and thebeautiful to darkness and ruin, that was of old the fate of Arda Marred; andif any change shall come and the Marring be amended, Manwe and Vardamay know; but they have not revealed it, and it is not declared in the doomsof Mandos.
AKALLABETH
AKAT.TABF.TH
The Downfall of Numenor
It is said by the Eldar that Men came into the world in the time of the Shadow ofMorgoth, and they fell swiftly under his dominion; for he sent his emissariesamong them, and they listened to his evil and cunning words, and theyworshipped the Darkness and yet feared it. But there were some that turned fromevil and left the lands of their kindred, and wandered ever westward; for theyhad heard a rumour that in the West there was a light which the Shadow couldnot dim. The servants of Morgoth pursued them with hatred, and their ways werelong and hard; yet they came at last to the lands that look upon the Sea, and theyentered Beleriand in the days of the War of the Jewels. The Edain these werenamed in the Sindarin tongue; and they became friends and allies of the Eldar,and did deeds of great valour in the war against Morgoth.
Of them was sprung, upon the side of his fathers, Bright Earendil; and in theLay of Earendil it is told how at the last, when the victory of Morgoth wasalmost complete, he built his ship Vingilot, that Men called Rothinzil, andvoyaged upon the unsailed seas, seeking ever for Valinor; for he desired to speakbefore the Powers on behalf of the Two Kindreds, that the Valar might have pityon them and send them help in their uttermost need. Therefore by Elves and Menhe is called Earendil the Blessed, for he achieved his quest after long labours andmany perils, and from Valinor there came the host of the Lords of the West. ButEarendil came never back to the lands that he had loved.
In the Great Battle when at last Morgoth was overthrown and Thangorodrimwas broken, the Edain alone of the kindreds of Men fought for the Valar,whereas many others fought for Morgoth. And after the victory of the Lords ofthe West those of the evil Men who were not destroyed fled back into the east,where many of their race were still wandering in the unharvested lands, wild andlawless, refusing alike the summons of the Valar and of Morgoth. And the evilMen came among them, and cast over them a shadow of fear, and they took themfor kings. Then the Valar forsook for a time the Men of Middle-earth who hadrefused their summons and had taken the friends of Morgoth to be their masters;and Men dwelt in darkness and were troubled by many evil things that Morgothhad devised in the days of his dominion: demons, and dragons, and misshapen
beasts, and the unclean Ores that are mockeries of the Children of Iluvatar. Andthe lot of Men was unhappy.
But Manwe put forth Morgoth and shut him beyond the World in the Void thatis without; and he cannot himself return again into the World, present andvisible, while the Lords of the West are still enthroned. Yet the seeds that he hadplanted still grew and sprouted, bearing evil fruit, if any would tend them. Forhis will remained and guided his servants, moving them ever to thwart the willof the Valar and to destroy those that obeyed them. This the Lords of the Westknew full well. When therefore Morgoth had been thrust forth, they held councilconcerning the ages that should come after. The Eldar they summoned to returninto the West, and those that hearkened to the summons dwelt in the Isle ofEressea; and there is in that land a haven that is named Avallone, for it is of allcities the nearest to Valinor, and the tower of Avallone is the first sight that themariner beholds when at last he draws nigh to the Undying Lands over theleagues of the Sea. To the Fathers of Men of the three faithful houses rich rewardalso was given. Eonwe came among them and taught them; and they were givenwisdom and power and life more enduring than any others of mortal race havepossessed. A land was made for the Edain to dwell in, neither part of Middle-earth nor of Valinor, for it was sundered from either by a wide sea; yet it wasnearer to Valinor. It was raised by Osse out of the depths of the Great Water, andit was established by Aule and enriched by Yavanna; and the Eldar broughtthither flowers and fountains out of Tol Eressea. That land the Valar calledAndor, the Land of Gift; and the Star of Earendil shone bright in the West as atoken that all was made ready, and as a guide over the sea; and Men marvelled tosee that silver flame in the paths of the Sun.
Then the Edain set sail upon the deep waters, following the Star; and the Valarlaid a peace upon the sea for many days, and sent sunlight and a sailing wind, sothat the waters glittered before the eyes of the Edain like rippling glass, and thefoam flew like snow before the stems of their ships. But so bright was Rothinzilthat even at morning Men could see it glimmering in the West, and in thecloudless night it shone alone, for no other star could stand beside it. And settingtheir course towards it the Edain came at last over leagues of sea and saw afarthe land that was prepared for them, Andor, the Land of Gift, shimmering in agolden haze. Then they went up out of the sea and found a country fair andfruitful, and they were glad. And they called that land Elenna, which isStarwards; but also Anadune, which is Westernesse, Numenore in the HighEldarin tongue.
This was the beginning of that people that in the Grey-elven speech are calledthe Dunedain: the Numenoreans, Kings among Men. But they did not thus
escape from the doom of death that Iluvatar had set upon all Mankind, and theywere mortal still, though their years were long, and they knew no sickness, erethe shadow fell upon them. Therefore they grew wise and glorious, and in allthings more like to the Firstborn than any other of the kindreds of Men; and theywere tall, taller than the tallest of the sons of Middle-earth; and the light of theireyes was like the bright stars. But their numbers increased only slowly in theland, for though daughters and sons were born to them, fairer than their fathers,yet their children were few.
Of old the chief city and haven of Numenor was in the midst of its westerncoasts, and it was called Andunie because it faced the sunset. But in the midst ofthe land was a mountain tall and steep, and it was named the Meneltarma, thePillar of Heaven, and upon it was a high place that was hallowed to Eru Iluvatar,and it was open and unroofed, and no other temple or fane was there in the landof the Numenoreans. At the feet of the mountain were built the tombs of theKings, and hard by upon a hill was Armenelos, fairest of cities, and there stoodthe tower and the citadel that was raised by Elros son of Earendil, whom theValar appointed to be the first King of the Diinedain.
Now Elros and Elrond his brother were descended from the Three Houses ofthe Edain, but in part also both from the Eldar and the Maiar; for Idril ofGondolin and Luthien daughter of Melian were their foremothers. The Valarindeed may not withdraw the gift of death, which comes to Men from Iluvatar,but in the matter of the Half-elven Iluvatar gave to them the judgement; and theyjudged that to the sons of Earendil should be given choice of their own destiny.And Elrond chose to remain with the Firstborn, and to him the life of theFirstborn was granted. But to Elros, who chose to be a king of Men, still a greatspan of years was allotted, many times that of the Men of Middle-earth; and allhis line, the kings and lords of the royal house, had long life even according tothe measure of the Numenoreans. But Elros lived five hundred years, and ruledthe Numenoreans four hundred years and ten.
Thus the years passed, and while Middle-earth went backward and light andwisdom faded, the Diinedain dwelt under the protection of the Valar and in thefriendship of the Eldar, and they increased in stature both of mind and body. Forthough this people used still their own speech, their kings and lords knew andspoke also the Elven tongue, which they had learned in the days of their alliance,and thus they held converse still with the Eldar, whether of Eressea or of thewestlands of Middle-earth. And the loremasters among them learned also theHigh Eldarin tongue of the Blessed Realm, in which much story and song waspreserved from the begin- ning of the world; and they made letters and scrollsand books, and wrote in them many things of wisdom and wonder in the high
tide of their realm, of which all is now forgot. So it came to pass that, besidetheir own names, all the lords of the Numenoreans had also Eldarin names; andthe like with the cities and fair places that they founded in Numenor and on theshores of the Hither Lands.
For the Dunedain became mighty in crafts, so that if they had had the mindthey could easily have surpassed the evil kings of Middle-earth in the making ofwar and the forging of weapons; but they were become men of peace. Above allarts they nourished ship-building and sea-craft, and they became mariners whoselike shall never be again since the world was diminished; and voyaging upon thewide seas was the chief feat and adventure of their hardy men in the gallant daysof their youth.
But the Lords of Valinor forbade them to sail so far westward that the coastsof Numenor could no longer be seen; and for long the Dunedain were content,though they did not fully understand the purpose of this ban. But the design ofManwe was that the Numenoreans should not be tempted to seek for the BlessedRealm, nor desire to overpass the limits set to their bliss, becoming enamouredof the immortality of the Valar and the Eldar and the lands where all thingsendure.
For in those days Valinor still remained in the world visible, and there Iluvatarpermitted the Valar to maintain upon Earth an abiding place, a memorial of thatwhich might have been if Morgoth had not cast his shadow on the world. Thisthe Numenoreans knew full well; and at times, when all the air was clear and thesun was in the east, they would look out and descry far off in the west a citywhite-shining on a distant shore, and a great harbour and a tower. For in thosedays the Numenoreans were far-sighted; yet even so it was only the keenest eyesamong them that could see this vision, from the Meneltarma, maybe, or fromsome tall ship that lay off their western coast as far as it was lawful for them togo. For they did not dare to break the Ban of the Lords of the West.
But the wise among them knew that this distant land was not indeed theBlessed Realm of Valinor, but was Avallone, the haven of the Eldar uponEressea, easternmost of the Undying Lands. And thence at times the Firstbornstill would come sailing to Numenor in oarless boats, as white birds flying fromthe sunset. And they brought to Numenor many gifts: birds of song, and fragrantflowers, and herbs of great virtue. And a seedling they brought of Celeborn, theWhite Tree that grew in the midst of Eressea; and that was in its turn a seedlingof Galathilion the Tree of Tuna, the image of Telperion that Yavanna gave to theEldar in the Blessed Realm. And the tree grew and blossomed in the courts ofthe King in Armenelos; Nimloth it was named, and flowered in the evening, andthe shadows of night it filled with its fragrance.
Thus it was that because of the Ban of the Valar the voyages of the Dunedainin those days went ever eastward and not westward, from the darkness of theNorth to the heats of the South, and beyond the South to the Nether Darkness;and they came even into the inner seas, and sailed about Middle-earth andglimpsed from their high prows the Gates of Morning in the East. And theDunedain came at times to the shores of the Great Lands, and they took pity onthe forsaken world of Middle-earth; and the Lords of Numenor set foot againupon the western shores in the Dark Years of Men, and none yet dared towithstand them. Lor most of the Men of that age that sat under the Shadow werenow grown weak and fearful. And coming among them the Numenoreans taughtthem many things. Corn and wine they brought, and they instructed Men in thesowing of seed and the grinding of grain, in the hewing of wood and the shapingof stone, and in the ordering of their life, such as it might be in the lands of swiftdeath and little bliss.
Then the Men of Middle-earth were comforted, and here and there upon thewestern shores the houseless woods drew back, and Men shook off the yoke ofthe offspring of Morgoth, and unlearned their terror of the dark. And theyrevered the memory of the tall Sea-kings, and when they had departed theycalled them gods, hoping for their return; for at that time the Numenoreans dweltnever long in Middle-earth, nor made there as yet any habitation of their own.Eastward they must sail, but ever west their hearts returned.
Now this yearning grew ever greater with the years; and the Numenoreansbegan to hunger for the undying city that they saw from afar, and the desire ofeverlasting life, to escape from death and the ending of delight, grew strongupon them; and ever as their power and glory grew greater their unquietincreased. Lor though the Valar had rewarded the Dunedain with long life, theycould not take from them the weariness of the world that comes at last, and theydied, even their kings of the seed of Earendil; and the span of their lives wasbrief in the eyes of the Eldar. Thus it was that a shadow fell upon them: in whichmaybe the will of Morgoth was at work that still moved in the world. And theNumenoreans began to murmur, at first in their hearts, and then in open words,against the doom of Men, and most of all against the Ban which forbade them tosail into the West.
And they said among themselves: 'Why do the Lords of the West sit there inpeace unending, while we must die and go we know not whither, leaving ourhome and all that we have made? And the Eldar die not, even those that rebelledagainst the Lords. And since we have mastered all seas, and no water is so wildor so wide that our ships cannot overcome it, why should we not go to Avalloneand greet there our friends?’
And some there were who said: ‘Why should we not go even to Aman, andtaste there, were it but for a day, the bliss of the Powers? Have we not becomemighty among the people of Arda?’
The Eldar reported these words to the Valar, and Manwe was grieved, seeing acloud gather on the noon-tide of Numenor. And he sent messengers to theDunedain, who spoke earnestly to the King, and to all who would listen,concerning the fate and fashion of the world.
‘The Doom of the World/ they said, ‘One alone can change who made it. Andwere you so to voyage that escaping all deceits and snares you came indeed toAman, the Blessed Realm, little would it profit you. For it is not the land ofManwe that makes its people deathless, but the Deathless that dwell therein havehallowed the land; and there you would but wither and grow weary the sooner,as moths in a light too strong and steadfast.’
But the King said: ‘And does not Earendil, my forefather, live? Or is he not inthe land of Aman?’
To which they answered: ‘You know that he has a fate apart, and wasadjudged to the Firstborn who die not; yet this also is his doom that he can neverreturn again to mortal lands. Whereas you and your people are not of theFirstborn, but are mortal Men as Iluvatar made you. Yet it seems that you desirenow to have the good of both kindreds, to sail to Valinor when you will, and toreturn when you please to your homes. That cannot be. Nor can the Valar takeaway the gifts of Iluvatar. The Eldar, you say, are unpunished, and even thosewho rebelled do not die. Yet that is to them neither reward nor punishment, butthe fulfilment of their being. They cannot escape, and are bound to this world,never to leave it so long as it lasts, for its life is theirs. And you are punished forthe rebellion of Men, you say, in which you had small part, and so it is that youdie. But that was not at first appointed for a punishment. Thus you escape, andleave the world, and are not bound to it, in hope or in weariness. Which of ustherefore should envy the others?’
And the Numenoreans answered: ‘Why should we not envy the Valar, or eventhe least of the Deathless? For of us is required a blind trust, and a hope withoutassurance, knowing not what lies before us in a little while. And yet we also lovethe Earth and would not lose it.’
Then the Messengers said: ‘Indeed the mind of Iluvatar concerning you is notknown to the Valar, and he has not revealed all things that are to come. But thiswe hold to be true, that your home is not here, neither in the Eand of Aman noranywhere within the Circles of the World. And the Doom of Men, that theyshould depart, was at first a gift of Iluvatar. It became a grief to them onlybecause coming under the shadow of Morgoth it seemed to them that they were
surrounded by a great darkness, of which they were afraid; and some grew wilfuland proud and would not yield, until life was reft from them. We who bear theever-mounting burden of the years do not clearly understand this; but if that griefhas returned to trouble you, as you say, then we fear that the Shadow arises oncemore and grows again in your hearts. Therefore, though you be the Dunedain,fairest of Men, who escaped from the Shadow of old and fought valiantly againstit, we say to you: Beware! The will of Eru may not be gainsaid; and the Valar bidyou earnestly not to withhold the trust to which you are called, lest soon itbecome again a bond by which you are constrained. Hope rather that in the endeven the least of your desires shall have fruit. The love of Arda was set in yourhearts by Iluvatar, and he does not plant to no purpose. Nonetheless, many agesof Men unborn may pass ere that purpose is made known; and to you it will berevealed and not to the Valar.’
These things took place in the days of Tar-Ciryatan the Shipbuilder, and ofTar-Atanamir his son; and they were proud men, eager for wealth, and they laidthe men of Middle-earth under tribute, taking now rather than giving. It was toTar-Atanamir that the Messengers came; and he was the thirteenth King, and inhis day the Realm of Numenor had endured for more than two thousand years,and was come to the zenith of its bliss, if not yet of its power. But Atanamir wasill pleased with the counsel of the Messengers and gave little heed to it, and thegreater part of his people followed him; for they wished still to escape death intheir own day, not waiting upon hope. And Atanamir lived to a great age,clinging to his life beyond the end of all joy; and he was the first of theNumenoreans to do this, refusing to depart until he was witless and unmanned,and denying to his son the kingship at the height of his days. For the Lords ofNumenor had been wont to wed late in their long lives and to depart and leavethe mastery to their sons when these were come to full stature of body and mind.
Then Tar-Ancalimon, son of Atanamir, became King, and he was of like mind;and in his day the people of Numenor became divided. On the one hand was thegreater party, and they were called the King’s Men, and they grew proud andwere estranged from the Eldar and the Valar. And on the other hand was thelesser party, and they were called the Elendili, the Elf-friends; for though theyremained loyal indeed to the King and the House of Elros, they wished to keepthe friendship of the Eldar, and they hearkened to the counsel of the Lords of theWest. Nonetheless even they, who named themselves the Faithful, did not whollyescape from the affliction of their people, and they were troubled by the thoughtof death.
Thus the bliss of Westernesse became diminished; but still its might andsplendour increased. For the kings and their people had not yet abandoned
wisdom, and if they loved the Valar no longer at least they still feared them.They did not dare openly to break the Ban or to sail beyond the limits that hadbeen appointed. Eastwards still they steered their tall ships. But the fear of deathgrew ever darker upon them, and they delayed it by all means that they could;and they began to build great houses for their dead, while their wise menlaboured unceasingly to discover if they might the secret of recalling life, or atthe least of the prolonging of Men’s days. Yet they achieved only the art ofpreserving incorrupt the dead flesh of Men, and they filled all the land withsilent tombs in which the thought of death was enshrined in the darkness. Butthose that lived turned the more eagerly to pleasure and revelry, desiring evermore goods and more riches; and after the days of Tar-Ancalimon the offering ofthe first fruits to Eru was neglected, and men went seldom any more to theHallow upon the heights of Meneltarma in the midst of the land.
Thus it came to pass in that time that the Numenoreans first made greatsettlements upon the west shores of the ancient lands; for their own land seemedto them shrunken, and they had no rest or content therein, and they desired nowwealth and dominion in Middle-earth, since the West was denied. Great harboursand strong towers they made, and there many of them took up their abode; butthey appeared now rather as lords and masters and gatherers of tribute than ashelpers and teachers. And the great ships of the Numenoreans were borne east onthe winds and returned ever laden, and the power and majesty of their kingswere increased; and they drank and they feasted and they clad themselves insilver and gold.
In all this the Elf-friends had small part. They alone came now ever to thenorth and the land of Gil-galad, keeping their friendship with the Elves andlending them aid against Sauron; and their haven was Pelargir above the mouthsof Anduin the Great. But the King’s Men sailed far away to the south; and thelordships and strongholds that they made have left many rumours in the legendsof Men.
In this Age, as is elsewhere told, Sauron arose again in Middle-earth, andgrew, and turned back to the evil in which he was nurtured by Morgoth,becoming mighty in his service. Already in the days of Tar-Minastir, theeleventh King of Numenor, he had fortified the land of Mordor and had builtthere the Tower of Barad-dur, and thereafter he strove ever for the dominion ofMiddle-earth, to become a king over all kings and as a god unto Men. AndSauron hated the Numenoreans, because of the deeds of their fathers and theirancient alliance with the Elves and allegiance to the Valar; nor did he forget theaid that Tar-Minastir had rendered to Gil-galad of old, in that time when the OneRing was forged and there was war between Sauron and the Elves in Eriador.Now he learned that the kings of Numenor had increased in power andsplendour, and he hated them the more; and he feared them, lest they shouldinvade his lands and wrest from him the dominion of the East. But for a longtime he did not dare to challenge the Lords of the Sea, and he withdrew from thecoasts.
Yet Sauron was ever guileful, and it is said that among those whom heensnared with the Nine Rings three were great lords of Numenorean race. Andwhen the Ulairi arose that were the Ring-wraiths, his servants, and the strengthof his terror and mastery over Men had grown exceedingly great, he began toassail the strong places of the Numenoreans upon the shores of the sea.
In those days the Shadow grew deeper upon Numenor; and the lives of theKings of the House of Elros waned because of their rebellion, but they hardenedtheir hearts the more against the Valar. And the twentieth king took the sceptre ofhis fathers, and he ascended the throne in the name of Adunakhor, Lord of theWest, forsaking the Elven-tongues and forbidding their use in his hearing. Yet inthe Scroll of Kings the name Herunumen was inscribed in the High-elvenspeech, because of ancient custom, which the kings feared to break utterly, lestevil befall. Now this title seemed to the Faithful over-proud, being the title of theValar; and their hearts were sorely tried between their loyalty to the House ofElros and their reverence of the appointed Powers. But worse was yet to come.For Ar-Gimilzor the twenty-third king was the greatest enemy of the Faithful. Inhis day the White Tree was untended and began to decline; and he forbadeutterly the use of the Elven-tongues, and punished those that welcomed the shipsof Eressea, that still came secretly to the west-shores of the land.
Now the Elendili dwelt mostly in the western regions of Numenor; but Ar-Gimilzor commanded all that he could discover to be of this party to remove
from the west and dwell in the east of the land; and there they were watched.And the chief dwelling of the Faithful in the later days was thus nigh to theharbour of Romenna; thence many set sail to Middle-earth, seeking the northerncoasts where they might speak still with the Eldar in the kingdom of Gil-galad.This was known to the kings, but they hindered it not, so long as the Elendilideparted from their land and did not return; for they desired to end all friendshipbetween their people and the Eldar of Eressea, whom they named the Spies ofthe Valar, hoping to keep their deeds and their counsels hidden from the Lords ofthe West. But all that they did was known to Manwe, and the Valar were wrothwith the Kings of Numenor, and gave them counsel and protection no more; andthe ships of Eressea came never again out of the sunset, and the havens ofAndunie were forlorn.
Highest in honour after the house of the kings were the Lords of Andunie; forthey were of the line of Elros, being descended from Silmarien, daughter of Tar-Elendil the fourth king of Numenor. And these lords were loyal to the kings, andrevered them; and the Lord of Andunie was ever among the chief councillors ofthe Sceptre. Yet also from the beginning they bore especial love to the Eldar andreverence for the Valar; and as the Shadow grew they aided the Faithful as theycould. But for long they did not declare themselves openly, and sought rather toamend the hearts of the lords of the Sceptre with wiser counsels.
There was a lady Inzilbeth, renowned for her beauty, and her mother wasLindorie, sister of Earendur, the Lord of Andunie in the days of Ar-Sakalthorfather of Ar-Gimilzor. Gimilzor took her to wife, though this was little to herliking, for she was in heart one of the Faithful, being taught by her mother; butthe kings and their sons were grown proud and not to be gainsaid in their wishes.No love was there between Ar-Gimilzor and his queen, or between their sons.Inziladun, the elder, was like his mother in mind as in body; but Gimilkhad, theyounger, went with his father, unless he were yet prouder and more wilful. Tohim Ar-Gimilzor would have yielded the sceptre rather than to the elder son, ifthe laws had allowed.
But when Inziladun acceded to the sceptre, he took again a title in the Elven-tongue as of old, calling himself Tar-Palantir, for he was far-sighted both in eyeand in mind, and even those that hated him feared his words as those of a true-seer. He gave peace for a while to the Faithful; and he went once more at dueseasons to the Hallow of Em upon the Meneltarma, which Ar-Gimilzor hadforsaken. The White Tree he tended again with honour; and he prophesied,saying that when the Tree perished, then also would the line of the Kings cometo its end. But his repentance was too late to appease the anger of the Valar withthe insolence of his fathers, of which the greater part of his people did not
repent. And Gimilkhad was strong and ungentle, and he took the leadership ofthose that had been called the King’s Men and opposed the will of his brother asopenly as he dared, and yet more in secret. Thus the days of Tar-Palantir becamedarkened with grief; and he would spend much of his time in the west, and thereascended often the ancient tower of King Minastir upon the hill of Oromet nighto Andunie, whence he gazed westward in yearning, hoping to see, maybe, somesail upon the sea. But no ship came ever again from the West to Numenor, andAvallone was veiled in cloud.
Now Gimilkhad died two years before his two hundredth year (which wasaccounted an early death for one of Elros’ line even in its waning), but thisbrought no peace to the King. For Pharazon son of Gimilkhad had become a manyet more restless and eager for wealth and power than his father. He had faredoften abroad, as a leader in the wars that the Numenoreans made then in thecoastlands of Middle-earth, seeking to extend their dominion over Men; and thushe had won great renown as a captain both by land and by sea. Therefore whenhe came back to Numenor, hearing of his father’s death, the hearts of the peoplewere turned to him; for he brought with him great wealth, and was for the timefree in his giving.
And it came to pass that Tar-Palantir grew weary of grief and died. He had noson, but a daughter only, whom he named Miriel in the Elven-tongue; and to hernow by right and the laws of the Numenoreans came the sceptre. But Pharazontook her to wife against her will, doing evil in this and evil also in that the lawsof Numenor did not permit the marriage, even in the royal house, of those morenearly akin than cousins in the second degree. And when they were wed- ded, heseized the sceptre into his own hand, taking the title of Ar-Pharazon (Tar-Calionin the Elven-tongue); and the name of his queen he changed to Ar-Zimraphel.
The mightiest and proudest was Ar-Pharazon the Golden of all those that hadwielded the Sceptre of the Sea-Kings since the foundation of Numenor; and fourand twenty Kings and Queens had ruled the Numenoreans before, and slept nowin their deep tombs under the mount of Meneltarma, lying upon beds of gold.
And sitting upon his carven throne in the city of Armenelos in the glory of hispower, he brooded darkly, thinking of war. For he had learned in Middle-earth ofthe strength of the realm of Sauron, and of his hatred of Westernesse. And nowthere came to him the masters of ships and captains returning out of the East, andthey reported that Sauron was putting forth his might, since Ar-Pharazon hadgone back from Middle-earth, and he was pressing down upon the cities by thecoasts; and he had taken now the title of King of Men, and declared his purposeto drive the Numenoreans into the sea, and destroy even Numenor, if that mightbe.
Great was the anger of Ar-Pharazon at these tidings, and as he pondered longin secret, his heart was filled with the desire of power unbounded and the soledominion of his will. And he determined without counsel of the Valar, or the aidof any wisdom but his own, that the title of King of Men he would himselfclaim, and would compel Sauron to become his vassal and his servant; for in hispride he deemed that no king should ever arise so mighty as to vie with the Heirof Earendil. Therefore he began in that time to smithy great hoard of weapons,and many ships of war he built and stored them with his arms; and when all wasmade ready he himself set sail with his host into the East.
And men saw his sails coming up out of the sunset, dyed as with scarlet andgleaming with red and gold, and fear fell upon the dwellers by the coasts, andthey fled far away. But the fleet came at last to that place that was called Umbar,where was the mighty haven of the Numenoreans that no hand had wrought.Empty and silent were all the lands about when the King of the Sea marchedupon Middle-earth. For seven days he journeyed with banner and trumpet, andhe came to a hill, and he went up, and he set there his pavilion and his throne;and he sat him down in the midst of the land, and the tents of his host wereranged all about him, blue, golden, and white, as a field of tall flowers. Then hesent forth heralds, and he commanded Sauron to come before him and swear tohim fealty.
And Sauron came. Even from his mighty tower of Baraddur he came, andmade no offer of battle. For he perceived that the power and majesty of theKings of the Sea surpassed all rumour of them, so that he could not trust eventhe greatest of his servants to withstand them; and he saw not his time yet towork his will with the Dunedain. And he was crafty, well skilled to gain what hewould by subtlety when force might not avail. Therefore he humbled himselfbefore Ar-Pharazon and smoothed his tongue; and men wondered, for all that hesaid seemed fair and wise.
But Ar-Pharazon was not yet deceived, and it came into his mind that, for thebetter keeping of Sauron and of his oaths of fealty, he should be brought toNumenor, there to dwell as a hostage for himself and all his servants in Middle-earth. To this Sauron assented as one constrained, yet in his secret thought hereceived it gladly, for it chimed indeed with his desire. And Sauron passed overthe sea and looked upon the land of Numenor, and on the city of Armenelos inthe days of its glory, and he was astounded; but his heart within was filled themore with envy and hate.
Yet such was the cunning of his mind and mouth, and the strength of hishidden will, that ere three years had passed he had become closest to the secretcounsels of the King; for flattery sweet as honey was ever on his tongue, and
knowledge he had of many things yet unrevealed to Men. And seeing the favourthat he had of their lord all the councillors began to fawn upon him, save onealone, Amandil lord of Andunie. Then slowly a change came over the land, andthe hearts of the Elf-friends were sorely troubled, and many fell away out offear; and although those that remained still called themselves the Faithful, theirenemies named them rebels. For now, having the ears of men, Sauron with manyarguments gainsaid all that the Valar had taught; and he bade men think that inthe world, in the east and even in the west, there lay yet many seas and manylands for their winning, wherein was wealth uncounted. And still, if they shouldat the last come to the end of those lands and seas, beyond all lay the AncientDarkness. ‘And out of it the world was made. For Darkness alone is worshipful,and the Ford thereof may yet make other worlds to be gifts to those that servehim, so that the increase of their power shall find no end.’
And Ar-Pharazon said: ‘Who is the Ford of the Darkness?’ Then behindlocked doors Sauron spoke to the King, and he lied, saying: ‘It is he whose nameis not now spoken; for the Valar have deceived you concerning him, puttingforward the name of Eru, a phantom devised in the folly of their hearts, seekingto enchain Men in servitude to themselves. For they are the oracle of this Eru,which speaks only what they will. But he that is their master shall yet prevail,and he will deliver you from this phantom; and his name is Melkor, Ford of All,Giver of Freedom, and he shall make you stronger than they.’
Then Ar-Pharazon the King turned back to the worship of the Dark, and ofMelkor the Ford thereof, at first in secret, but ere long openly and in the face ofhis people; and they for the most part followed him. Yet there dwelt still aremnant of the Faithful, as has been told, at Romenna and in the country near,and other few there were here and there in the land. The chief among them, towhom they looked for leading and courage in evil days, was Amandil, councillorof the King, and his son Elendil, whose sons were Isildur and Anarion, thenyoung men by the reckoning of Numenor. Amandil and Elendil were great ship-captains; and they were of the line of Elros Tar-Minyatur, though not of theruling house to whom belonged the crown and the throne in the city ofArmenelos. In the days of their youth together Amandil had been dear toPharazon, and though he was of the Elf-friends he remained in his council untilthe coming of Sauron. Now he was dismissed, for Sauron hated him above allothers in Numenor. But he was so noble, and had been so mighty a captain of thesea, that he was still held in honour by many of the people, and neither the Kingnor Sauron dared to lay hands on him as yet.
Therefore Amandil withdrew to Romenna, and all that he trusted still to befaithful he summoned to come thither in secret; for he feared that evil would
now grow apace, and all the Elf-friends were in peril. And so it soon came topass. For the Meneltarma was utterly deserted in those days; and though noteven Sauron dared to defile the high place, yet the King would let no man, uponpain of death, ascend to it, not even those of the Faithful who kept Iluvatar intheir hearts. And Sauron urged the King to cut down the White Tree, Nimloth theFair, that grew in his courts, for it was a memorial of the Eldar and of the light ofValinor.
At the first the King would not assent to this, since he believed that thefortunes of his house were bound up with the Tree, as was forespoken by Tar-Palantir. Thus in his folly he who now hated the Eldar and the Valar vainly clungto the shadow of the old allegiance of Numenor. But when Amandil heardrumour of the evil purpose of Sauron he was grieved to the heart, knowing thatin the end Sauron would surely have his will. Then he spoke to Elendil and thesons of Elendil, recalling the tale of the Trees of Valinor; and Isildur said noword, but went out by night and did a deed for which he was afterwardsrenowned. For he passed alone in disguise to Armenelos and to the courts of theKing, which were now forbidden to the Faithful; and he came to the place of theTree, which was forbidden to all by the orders of Sauron, and the Tree waswatched day and night by guards in his service. At that time Nimloth was darkand bore no bloom, for it was late in the autumn, and its winter was nigh; andIsildur passed through the guards and took from the Tree a fruit that hung uponit, and turned to go. But the guard was aroused, and he was assailed, and foughthis way out, receiving many wounds; and he escaped, and because he wasdisguised it was not discovered who had laid hands on the Tree. But Isildur cameat last hardly back to Romenna and delivered the fruit to the hands of Amandil,ere his strength failed him. Then the fruit was planted in secret, and it wasblessed by Amandil; and a shoot arose from it and sprouted in the spring. Butwhen its first leaf opened then Isildur, who had lain long and come near to death,arose and was troubled no more by his wounds.
None too soon was this done; for after the assault the King yielded to Sauronand felled the White Tree, and turned then wholly away from the allegiance ofhis fathers. But Sauron caused to be built upon the hill in the midst of the city ofthe Numenoreans, Armenelos the Golden, a mighty temple; and it was in theform of a circle at the base, and there the walls were fifty feet in thickness, andthe width of the base was five hundred feet across the centre, and the walls rosefrom the ground five hundred feet, and they were crowned with a mighty dome.And that dome was roofed all with silver, and rose glittering in the sun, so thatthe light of it could be seen afar off; but soon the light was darkened, and thesilver became black. For there was an altar of fire in the midst of the temple, and
in the topmost of the dome there was a louver, whence there issued a greatsmoke. And the first fire upon the altar Sauron kindled with the hewn wood ofNimloth, and it crackled and was consumed; but men marvelled at the reek thatwent up from it, so that the land lay under a cloud for seven days, until slowly itpassed into the west.
Thereafter the fire and smoke went up without ceasing; for the power ofSauron daily increased, and in that temple, with spilling of blood and tormentand great wickedness, men made sacrifice to Melkor that he should release themfrom Death. And most often from among the Faithful they chose their victims;yet never openly on the charge that they would not worship Melkor, the Giver ofFreedom, rather was cause sought against them that they hated the King andwere his rebels, or that they plotted against their kin, devising lies and poisons.These charges were for the most part false; yet those were bitter days, and hatebrings forth hate.
But for all this Death did not depart from the land, rather it came sooner andmore often, and in many dreadful guises. For whereas aforetime men had grownslowly old, and had laid them down in the end to sleep, when they were weary atlast of the world, now madness and sickness assailed them; and yet they wereafraid to die and go out into the dark, the realm of the lord that they had taken;and they cursed themselves in their agony. And men took weapons in those daysand slew one another for little cause; for they were become quick to anger, andSauron, or those whom he had bound to himself, went about the land setting managainst man, so that the people murmured against the King and the lords, oragainst any that had aught that they had not; and the men of power took cruelrevenge.
Nonetheless for long it seemed to the Numenoreans that they prospered, and ifthey were not increased in happiness, yet they grew more strong, and their richmen ever richer. For with the aid and counsel of Sauron they multiplied theirpossessions, and they devised engines, and they built ever greater ships. Andthey sailed now with power and armoury to Middle-earth, and they came nolonger as bringers of gifts, nor even as rulers, but as fierce men of war. And theyhunted the men of Middle-earth and took their goods and enslaved them, andmany they slew cruelly upon their altars. For they built in their fortressestemples and great tombs in those days; and men feared them, and the memory ofthe kindly kings of the ancient days faded from the world and was darkened bymany a tale of dread.
Thus Ar-Pharazon, King of the Land of the Star, grew to the mightiest tyrantthat had yet been in the world since the reign of Morgoth, though in truth Sauronruled all from behind the throne. But the years passed, and the King felt the
shadow of death approach, as his days lengthened; and he was filled with fearand wrath. Now came the hour that Sauron had prepared and long had awaited.And Sauron spoke to the King, saying that his strength was now so great that hemight think to have his will in all things, and be subject to no command or ban.
And he said: ‘The Valar have possessed themselves of the land where there isno death; and they lie to you concerning it, hiding it as best they may, because oftheir avarice, and their fear lest the Kings of Men should wrest from them thedeathless realm and rule the world in their stead. And though, doubtless, the giftof life unending is not for all, but only for such as are worthy, being men ofmight and pride and great lineage, yet against all justice is it done that this gift,which is his due, should be withheld from the King of Kings, Ar-Pharazon,mightiest of the sons of Earth, to whom Manwe alone can be compared, if evenhe. But great kings do not brook denials, and take what is their due.’
Then Ar-Pharazon, being besotted, and walking under the shadow of death,for his span was drawing towards its end, hearkened to Sauron; and he began toponder in his heart how he might make war upon the Valar. He was longpreparing this design, and he spoke not openly of it, yet it could not be hiddenfrom all. And Amandil, becoming aware of the purposes of the King, wasdismayed and filled with a great dread, for he knew that Men could not vanquishthe Valar in war, and that ruin must come upon the world, if this war were notstayed. Therefore he called his son, Elendil, and he said to him:
‘The days are dark, and there is no hope for Men, for the Faithful are few.Therefore I am minded to try that counsel which our forefather Earendil took ofold, to sail into the West, be there ban or no, and to speak to the Valar, even toManwe himself, if may be, and beseech his aid ere all is lost.’
‘Would you then betray the King?’ said Elendil. ‘For you know well thecharge that they make against us, that we are traitors and spies, and that until thisday it has been false.’
‘If I thought that Manwe needed such a messenger,’ said Amandil, ‘I wouldbetray the King. For there is but one loyalty from which no man can be absolvedin heart for any cause. But it is for mercy upon Men and their deliverance fromSauron the Deceiver that I would plead, since some at least have remainedfaithful. And as for the Ban, I will suffer in myself the penalty, lest all my peopleshould become guilty.’
‘But what think you, my father, is like to befall those of your house whom youleave behind, when your deed becomes known?’
‘It must not become known,’ said Amandil. ‘I will prepare my going in secret,and I will set sail into the east, whither daily the ships depart from our havens;and thereafter, as wind and chance may allow, I will go about, through south or
north, back into the west, and seek what I may find. But for you and your folk,my son, I counsel that you should prepare yourselves other ships, and put aboardall such things as your hearts cannot bear to part with; and when the ships areready, you should lie in the haven of Romenna, and give out among men thatyou purpose, when you see your time, to follow me into the east. Amandil is nolonger so dear to our kinsman upon the throne that he will grieve over much, ifwe seek to depart, for a season or for good. But let it not be seen that you intendto take many men, or he will be troubled, because of the war that he now plots,for which he will need all the force that he may gather. Seek out the Faithful thatare known still to be true, and let them join you in secret, if they are willing to gowith you, and share in your design.’
‘And what shall that design be?’ said Elendil.
‘To meddle not in the war, and to watch,’ answered Amandil. ‘Until I return Ican say no more. But it is most like that you shall fly from the Land of the Starwith no star to guide you; for that land is defiled. Then you shall lose all that youhave loved, foretasting death in life, seeking a land of exile elsewhere. But eastor west the Valar alone can say.’
Then Amandil said farewell to all his household, as one that is about to die.‘For,’ said he, ‘it may well prove that you will see me never again; and that Ishall show you no such sign as Earendil showed long ago. But hold you ever inreadiness, for the end of the world that we have known is now at hand.’
It is said that Amandil set sail in a small ship at night, and steered firsteastward, and then went about and passed into the west. And he took with himthree servants, dear to his heart, and never again were they heard of by word orsign in this world, nor is there any tale or guess of their fate. Men could not asecond time be saved by any such embassy, and for the treason of Numenorthere was no easy absolving.
But Elendil did all that his father had bidden, and his ships lay off the eastcoast of the land; and the Faithful put aboard their wives and their children, andtheir heirlooms, and great store of goods. Many things there were of beauty andpower, such as the Numenoreans had contrived in the days of their wisdom,vessels and jewels, and scrolls of lore written in scarlet and black. And SevenStones they had, the gift of the Eldar; but in the ship of Isildur was guarded theyoung tree, the scion of Nimloth the Fair. Thus Elendil held himself in readiness,and did not meddle in the evil deeds of those days; and ever he looked for a signthat did not come. Then he journeyed in secret to the western shores and gazedout over the sea, for sorrow and yearning were upon him, and he greatly lovedhis father. But naught could he descry save the fleets of Ar-Pharazon gatheringin the havens of the west.
Now aforetime in the isle of Numenor the weather was ever apt to the needsand liking of Men: rain in due season and ever in measure; and sunshine, nowwarmer, now cooler, and winds from the sea. And when the wind was in thewest, it seemed to many that it was filled with a fragrance, fleeting but sweet,heart-stirring, as of flowers that bloom for ever in undying meads and have nonames on mortal shores. But all this was now changed; for the sky itself wasdarkened, and there were storms of rain and hail in those days, and violentwinds; and ever and anon a great ship of the Numenoreans would founder andreturn not to haven, though such a grief had not till then befallen them since therising of the Star. And out of the west there would come at times a great cloud inthe evening, shaped as it were an eagle, with pinions spread to the north and thesouth; and slowly it would loom up, blotting out the sunset, and then uttermostnight would fall upon Numenor. And some of the eagles bore lightning beneaththeir wings, and thunder echoed between sea and cloud.
Then men grew afraid. ‘Behold the Eagles of the Lords of the West!’ theycried. ‘The Eagles of Manwe are come upon Numenor!’ And they fell upon theirfaces.
Then some few would repent for a season, but others hardened their hearts,and they shook their fists at heaven, saying: ‘The Lords of the West have plottedagainst us. They strike first. The next blow shall be ours!’ These words the Kinghimself spoke, but they were devised by Sauron.
Now the lightnings increased and slew men upon the hills, and in the fields,and in the streets of the city; and a fiery bolt smote the dome of the Temple andshore it asunder, and it was wreathed in flame. But the Temple itself wasunshaken, and Sauron stood there upon the pinnacle and defied the lightning andwas unharmed; and in that hour men called him a god and did all that he would.When therefore the last portent came they heeded it little. For the land shookunder them, and a groaning as of thunder underground was mingled with theroaring of the sea, and smoke issued from the peak of the Meneltarma. But allthe more did Ar-Pharazon press on with his armament.
In that time the fleets of the Numenoreans darkened the sea upon the west ofthe land, and they were like an archipelago of a thousand isles; their masts wereas a forest upon the mountains, and their sails like a brooding cloud; and theirbanners were golden and black. And all things waited upon the word of Ar-Pharazon; and Sauron withdrew into the inmost circle of the Temple, and menbrought him victims to be burned.
Then the Eagles of the Lords of the West came up out of the dayfall, and theywere arrayed as for battle, advancing in a line the end of which diminishedbeyond sight; and as they came their wings spread ever wider, grasping the sky.
But the West burned red behind them, and they glowed beneath, as though theywere lit with a flame of great anger, so that all Numenor was illumined as with asmouldering fire; and men looked upon the faces of their fellows, and it seemedto them that they were red with wrath.
Then Ar-Pharazon hardened his heart, and he went aboard his mighty ship,Alcarondas, Castle of the Sea. Many-oared it was and many-masted, golden andsable; and upon it the throne of Ar-Pharazon was set. Then he did on his panoplyand his crown, and let raise his standard, and he gave the signal for the raising ofthe anchors; and in that hour the trumpets of Numenor outrang the thunder.
Thus the fleets of the Numenoreans moved against the menace of the West;and there was little wind, but they had many oars and many strong slaves to rowbeneath the lash. The sun went down, and there came a great silence. Darknessfell upon the land, and the sea was still, while the world waited for what shouldbetide. Slowly the fleets passed out of the sight of the watchers in the havens,and their lights faded, and night took them; and in the morning they were gone.For a wind arose in the east and it wafted them away; and they broke the Ban ofthe Valar, and sailed into forbidden seas, going up with war against theDeathless, to wrest from them everlasting life within the Circles of the World.
But the fleets of Ar-Pharazon came up out of the deeps of the sea andencompassed Avallone and all the isle of Eressea, and the Eldar mourned, for thelight of the setting sun was cut off by the cloud of the Numenoreans. And at lastAr-Pharazon came even to Aman, the Blessed Realm, and the coasts of Valinor;and still all was silent, and doom hung by a thread. For Ar-Pharazon wavered atthe end, and almost he turned back. His heart misgave him when he looked uponthe soundless shores and saw Taniquetil shining, whiter than snow, colder thandeath, silent, immutable, terrible as the shadow of the light of Iluvatar. But pridewas now his master, and at last he left his ship and strode upon the shore,claiming the land for his own, if none should do battle for it. And a host of theNumenoreans encamped in might about Tuna, whence all the Eldar had fled.
Then Manwe upon the Mountain called upon Iluvatar, and for that time theValar laid down their government of Arda. But Iluvatar showed forth his power,and he changed the fashion of the world; and a great chasm opened in the seabetween Numenor and the Deathless Lands, and the waters flowed down into it,and the noise and smoke of the cataracts went up to heaven, and the world wasshaken. And all the fleets of the Numenoreans were drawn down into the abyss,and they were drowned and swallowed up for ever. But Ar-Pharazon the Kingand the mortal warriors that had set foot upon the land of Aman were buriedunder falling hills: there it is said that they lie imprisoned in the Caves of theForgotten, until the Last Battle and the Day of Doom.
But the land of Aman and Eressea of the Eldar were taken away and removedbeyond the reach of Men for ever. And Andor, the Land of Gift, Numenor of theKings, Elenna of the Star of Earendil, was utterly destroyed. For it was nigh tothe east of the great rift, and its foundations were overturned, and it fell and wentdown into darkness, and is no more. And there is not now upon Earth any placeabiding where the memory of a time without evil is preserved. For Iluvatar castback the Great Seas west of Middle-earth, and the Empty Lands east of it, andnew lands and new seas were made; and the world was diminished, for Valinorand Eressea were taken from it into the realm of hidden things.
In an hour unlooked for by Men this doom befell, on the nine and thirtieth daysince the passing of the fleets. Then suddenly fire burst from the Meneltarma,and there came a mighty wind and a tumult of the earth, and the sky reeled, andthe hills slid, and Numenor went down into the sea, with all its children and itswives and its maidens and its ladies proud; and all its gardens and its halls andits towers, its tombs and its riches, and its jewels and its webs and its things
painted and carven, and its laughter and its mirth and its music, its wisdom andits lore: they vanished for ever. And last of all the mounting wave, green andcold and plumed with foam, climbing over the land, took to its bosom Tar-Mirielthe Queen, fairer than silver or ivory or pearls. Too late she strove to ascend thesteep ways of the Meneltarma to the holy place; for the waters overtook her, andher cry was lost in the roaring of the wind.
But whether or no it were that Amandil came indeed to Valinor and Manwehearkened to his prayer, by grace of the Valar Elendil and his sons and theirpeople were spared from the ruin of that day. For Elendil had remained inRomenna, refusing the summons of the King when he set forth to war; andavoiding the soldiers of Sauron that came to seize him and drag him to the firesof the Temple, he went aboard his ship and stood off from the shore, waiting onthe time. There he was protected by the land from the great draught of the seathat drew all towards the abyss, and afterwards he was sheltered from the firstfury of the storm. But when the devouring wave rolled over the land andNumenor toppled to its fall, then he would have been overwhelmed and wouldhave deemed it the lesser grief to perish, for no wrench of death could be morebitter than the loss and agony of that day; but the great wind took him, wilderthan any wind that Men had known, roaring from the west, and it swept his shipsfar away; and it rent their sails and snapped their masts, hunting the unhappymen like straws upon the water.
Nine ships there were: four for Elendil, and for Isildur three, and for Anariontwo; and they fled before the black gale out of the twilight of doom into thedarkness of the world. And the deeps rose beneath them in towering anger, andwaves like unto mountains moving with great caps of writhen snow bore themup amid the wreckage of the clouds, and after many days cast them away uponthe shores of Middle-earth. And all the coasts and seaward regions of thewestern world suffered great change and ruin in that time; for the seas invadedthe lands, and shores foundered, and ancient isles were drowned, and new isleswere uplifted; and hills crumbled and rivers were turned into strange courses.
Elendil and his sons after founded kingdoms in Middle-earth; and though theirlore and craft was but an echo of that which had been ere Sauron came toNumenor, yet very great it seemed to the wild men of the world. And much issaid in other lore of the deeds of the heirs of Elendil in the age that came after,and of their strife with Sauron that not yet was ended.
For Sauron himself was filled with great fear at the wrath of the Valar, and thedoom that Eru laid upon sea and land. It was greater far than aught he hadlooked for, hoping only for the death of the Numenoreans and the defeat of theirproud king. And Sauron, sitting in his black seat in the midst of the Temple, hadlaughed when he heard the trumpets of Ar-Pharazon sounding for battle; andagain he had laughed when he heard the thunder of the storm; and a third time,even as he laughed at his own thought, thinking what he would do now in theworld, being rid of the Edain for ever, he was taken in the midst of his mirth, andhis seat and his temple fell into the abyss. But Sauron was not of mortal flesh,and though he was robbed now of that shape in which he had wrought so greatan evil, so that he could never again appear fair to the eyes of Men, yet his spiritarose out of the deep and passed as a shadow and a black wind over the sea, andcame back to Middle-earth and to Mordor that was his home. There he took upagain his great Ring in Barad-dur, and dwelt there, dark and silent, until hewrought himself a new guise, an image of malice and hatred made visible; andthe Eye of Sauron the Terrible few could endure.
But these things come not into the tale of the Drowning of Numenor, of whichnow all is told. And even the name of that land perished, and Men spokethereafter not of Elenna, nor of Andor the Gift that was taken away, nor ofNumenore on the confines of the world; but the exiles on the shores of the sea, ifthey turned towards the West in the desire of their hearts, spoke of Mar-nu-Falmar that was whelmed in the waves, Akallabeth the Downfallen, Atalante inthe Eldarin tongue.
Among the Exiles many believed that the summit of the Meneltarma, thePillar of Heaven, was not drowned for ever, but rose again above the waves,a lonely island lost in the great waters; for it had been a hallowed place, andeven in the days of Sauron none had defiled it. And some there were of theseed of Earendil that afterwards sought for it, because it was said amongloremasters that the farsighted men of old could see from the Meneltarma aglimmer of the Deathless Land. For even after the ruin the hearts of theDunedain were still set westwards; and though they knew indeed that theworld was changed, they said: ‘Avallone is vanished from the Earth and theLand of Aman is taken away, and in the world of this present darkness theycannot be found. Yet once they were, and therefore they still are, in truebeing and in the whole shape of the world as at first it was devised.’
For the Dunedain held that even mortal Men, if so blessed, might lookupon other times than those of their bodies’ life; and they longed ever toescape from the shadows of their exile and to see in some fashion the lightthat dies not; for the sorrow of the thought of death had pursued them overthe deeps of the sea. Thus it was that great mariners among them would stillsearch the empty seas, hoping to come upon the Isle of Meneltarma, andthere to see a vision of things that were. But they found it not. And thosethat sailed far came only to the new lands, and found them like to the oldlands, and subject to death. And those that sailed furthest set but a girdleabout the Earth and returned weary at last to the place of their beginning;and they said: ‘All roads are now bent.’
Thus in after days, what by the voyages of ships, what by lore and star-craft, the kings of Men knew that the world was indeed made round, and yetthe Eldar were permitted still to depart and to come to the Ancient West andto Avallone, if they would. Therefore the loremasters of Men said that aStraight Road must still be, for those that were permitted to find it. Andthey taught that, while the new world fell away, the old road and the path ofthe memory of the West still went on, as it were a mighty bridge invisiblethat passed through the air of breath and of flight (which were bent now asthe world was bent), and traversed Ilmen which flesh unaided cannotendure, until it came to Tol Eressea, the Lonely Isle, and maybe evenbeyond, to Valinor, where the Valar still dwell and watch the unfolding ofthe story of the world. And tales and rumours arose along the shores of thesea concerning mariners and men forlorn upon the water who, by some fate
or grace or favour of the Valar, had entered in upon the Straight Way andseen the face of the world sink below them, and so had come to the lamplitquays of Avallone, or verily to the last beaches on the margin of Aman, andthere had looked upon the White Mountain, dreadful and beautiful, beforethey died.
OF THE RINGS OF POWER AND THE THIRD AGE
OF THF. RTNGS OF POWER AND THF.
TFIIRD AGF.
in which these tales come to their end
Of old there was Sauron the Maia, whom the Sindar in Beleriand namedGorthaur. In the beginning of Arda Melkor seduced him to his allegiance, and hebecame the greatest and most trusted of the servants of the Enemy, and the mostperilous, for he could assume many forms, and for long if he willed he could stillappear noble and beautiful, so as to deceive all but the most wary.
When Thangorodrim was broken and Morgoth overthrown, Sauron put on hisfair hue again and did obeisance to Eonwe, the herald of Manwe, and abjured allhis evil deeds. And some hold that this was not at first falsely done, but thatSauron in truth repented, if only out of fear, being dismayed by the fall ofMorgoth and the great wrath of the Lords of the West. But it was not within thepower of Eonwe to pardon those of his own order, and he commanded Sauron toreturn to Aman and there receive the judgement of Manwe. Then Sauron wasashamed, and he was unwilling to return in humiliation and to receive from theValar a sentence, it might be, of long servitude in proof of his good faith; forunder Morgoth his power had been great. Therefore when Eonwe departed hehid himself in Middle-earth; and he fell back into evil, for the bonds thatMorgoth had laid upon him were very strong.
In the Great Battle and the tumults of the fall of Thangorodrim there weremighty convulsions in the earth, and Beleriand was broken and laid waste; andnorthward and westward many lands sank beneath the waters of the Great Sea.In the east, in Ossiriand, the walls of Ered Luin were broken, and a great gapwas made in them towards the south, and a gulf of the sea flowed in. Into thatgulf the River Lhun fell by a new course, and it was called therefore the Gulf ofLhun. That country had of old been named Lindon by the Noldor, and this nameit bore thereafter; and many of the Eldar still dwelt there, lingering, unwilling yetto forsake Beleriand where they had fought and laboured long. Gil-galad son ofFingon was their king, and with him was Elrond Half-elven, son of Earendil the
Mariner and brother of Elros first king of Numenor.
Upon the shores of the Gulf of Lhun the Elves built their havens, and namedthem Mithlond; and there they held many ships, for the harbourage was good.From the Grey Havens the Eldar ever and anon set sail, fleeing from thedarkness of the days of Earth; for by the mercy of the Valar the First-born couldstill follow the Straight Road and return, if they would, to their kindred inEressea and Valinor beyond the encircling seas.
Others of the Eldar there were who crossed the mountains of Ered Luin in thatage and passed into the inner lands. Many of these were Teleri, survivors ofDoriath and Ossiriand; and they established realms among the Silvan Elves inwoods and mountains far from the sea, for which nonetheless they ever yearnedin their hearts. Only in Eregion, which Men called Hollin, did Elves of Noldorinrace establish a lasting realm beyond the Ered Luin. Eregion was nigh to thegreat mansions of the Dwarves that were named Khazad-dum, but by the ElvesHadhodrond, and afterwards Moria. From Ost-in-Edhil, the city of the Elves, thehighroad ran to the west gate of Khazad-dum, for a friendship arose betweenDwarves and Elves, such as has never elsewhere been, to the enrichment of boththose peoples. In Eregion the craftsmen of the Gwaith-i-Mirdain, the People ofthe Jewel-smiths, surpassed in cunning all that have ever wrought, save onlyFeanor himself; and indeed greatest in skill among them was Celebrimbor, sonof Curufin, who was estranged from his father and remained in Nargothrondwhen Celegorm and Curufin were driven forth, as is told in the QuentaSilmarillion.
Elsewhere in Middle-earth there was peace for many years; yet the lands werefor the most part savage and desolate, save only where the people of Beleriandcame. Many Elves dwelt there indeed, as they had dwelt through the countlessyears, wandering free in the wide lands far from the Sea; but they were Avari, towhom the deeds of Beleriand were but a rumour and Valinor only a distantname. And in the south and in the further east Men multiplied; and most of themturned to evil, for Sauron was at work.
Seeing the desolation of the world, Sauron said in his heart that the Valar,having overthrown Morgoth, had again forgotten Middle-earth; and his pridegrew apace. He looked with hatred on the Eldar, and he feared the Men ofNumenor who came back at whiles in their ships to the shores of Middle-earth;but for long he dissembled his mind and concealed the dark designs that heshaped in his heart.
Men he found the easiest to sway of all the peoples of the Earth; but long hesought to persuade the Elves to his service, for he knew that the Firstborn hadthe greater power; and he went far and wide among them, and his hue was stillthat of one both fair and wise. Only to Lindon he did not come, for Gil-galad andElrond doubted him and his fair-seeming, and though they knew not who in truthhe was they would not admit him to that land. But elsewhere the Elves receivedhim gladly, and few among them hearkened to the messengers from Lindonbidding them beware; for Sauron took to himself the name of Annatar, the Lordof Gifts, and they had at first much profit from his friendship. And he said tothem: ‘Alas, for the weakness of the great! For a mighty king is Gil-galad, andwise in all lore is Master Elrond, and yet they will not aid me in my labours. Canit be that they do not desire to see other lands become as blissful as their own?But wherefore should Middle-earth remain for ever desolate and dark, whereasthe Elves could make it as fair as Eressea, nay even as Valinor? And since youhave not returned thither, as you might, I perceive that you love this Middle-earth, as do I. Is it not then our task to labour together for its enrichment, and forthe raising of all the Elven-kindreds that wander here untaught to the height ofthat power and knowledge which those have who are beyond the Sea?’
It was in Eregion that the counsels of Sauron were most gladly received, for inthat land the Noldor desired ever to increase the skill and subtlety of their works.Moreover they were not at peace in their hearts, since they had refused to returninto the West, and they desired both to stay in Middle-earth, which indeed theyloved, and yet to enjoy the bliss of those that had departed. Therefore they
hearkened to Sauron, and they learned of him many things, for his knowledgewas great. In those days the smiths of Ost-in-Edhil surpassed all that they hadcontrived before; and they took thought, and they made Rings of Power. ButSauron guided their labours, and he was aware of all that they did; for his desirewas to set a bond upon the Elves and to bring them under his vigilance.
Now the Elves made many rings; but secretly Sauron made One Ring to ruleall the others, and their power was bound up with it, to be subject wholly to itand to last only so long as it too should last. And much of the strength and willof Sauron passed into that One Ring; for the power of the Elven-rings was verygreat, and that which should govern them must be a thing of surpassing potency;and Sauron forged it in the Mountain of Fire in the Land of Shadow. And whilehe wore the One Ring he could perceive all the things that were done by meansof the lesser rings, and he could see and govern the very thoughts of those thatwore them.
But the Elves were not so lightly to be caught. As soon as Sauron set the OneRing upon his finger they were aware of him; and they knew him, and perceivedthat he would be master of them, and of all that they wrought. Then in anger andfear they took off their rings. But he, finding that he was betrayed and that theElves were not deceived, was filled with wrath; and he came against them withopen war, demanding that all the rings should be delivered to him, since theElven-smiths could not have attained to their making without his lore andcounsel. But the Elves fled from him; and three of their rings they saved, andbore them away, and hid them.
Now these were the Three that had last been made, and they possessed thegreatest powers. Narya, Nenya, and Vilya, they were named, the Rings of Fire,and of Water, and of Air, set with ruby and adamant and sapphire; and of all theElven-rings Sauron most desired to possess them, for those who had them intheir keeping could ward off the decays of time and postpone the weariness ofthe world. But Sauron could not discover them, for they were given into thehands of the Wise, who concealed them and never again used them openly whileSauron kept the Ruling Ring. Therefore the Three remained unsullied, for theywere forged by Celebrimbor alone, and the hand of Sauron had never touchedthem; yet they also were subject to the One.
From that time war never ceased between Sauron and the Elves; and Eregionwas laid waste, and Celebrimbor slain, and the doors of Moria were shut. In thattime the stronghold and refuge of Imladris, that Men called Rivendell, wasfounded by Elrond Half-elven; and long it endured. But Sauron gathered into hishands all the remaining Rings of Power; and he dealt them out to the otherpeoples of Middle-earth, hoping thus to bring under his sway all those that
desired secret power beyond the measure of their kind. Seven rings he gave tothe Dwarves; but to Men he gave nine, for Men proved in this matter as in othersthe readiest to his will. And all those rings that he governed he perverted, themore easily since he had a part in their making, and they were accursed, and theybetrayed in the end all those that used them. The Dwarves indeed proved toughand hard to tame; they ill endure the domination of others, and the thoughts oftheir hearts are hard to fathom, nor can they be turned to shadows. They usedtheir rings only for the getting of wealth; but wrath and an overmastering greedof gold were kindled in their hearts, of which evil enough after came to the profitof Sauron. It is said that the foundation of each of the Seven Hoards of theDwarf-kings of old was a golden ring; but all those hoards long ago wereplundered and the Dragons devoured them, and of the Seven Rings some wereconsumed in fire and some Sauron recovered.
Men proved easier to ensnare. Those who used the Nine Rings became mightyin their day, kings, sorcerers, and warriors of old. They obtained glory and greatwealth, yet it turned to their undoing. They had, as it seemed, unending life, yetlife became unendurable to them. They could walk, if they would, unseen by alleyes in this world beneath the sun, and they could see things in worlds invisibleto mortal men; but too often they beheld only the phantoms and delusions ofSauron. And one by one, sooner or later, according to their native strength and tothe good or evil of their wills in the beginning, they fell under the thraldom ofthe ring that they bore and under the domination of the One, which wasSauron’s. And they became for ever invisible save to him that wore the RulingRing, and they entered into the realm of shadows. The Nazgul were they, theRingwraiths, the Enemy’s most terrible servants; darkness went with them, andthey cried with the voices of death.
Now Sauron’s lust and pride increased, until he knew no bounds, and hedetermined to make himself master of all things in Middle-earth, and to destroythe Elves, and to compass, if he might, the downfall of Numenor. He brooked nofreedom nor any rivalry, and he named himself Lord of the Earth. A mask he stillcould wear so that if he wished he might deceive the eyes of Men, seeming tothem wise and fair. But he ruled rather by force and fear, if they might avail; andthose who perceived his shadow spreading over the world called him the DarkLord and named him the Enemy; and he gathered again under his government allthe evil things of the days of Morgoth that remained on earth or beneath it, andthe Ores were at his command and multiplied like flies. Thus the Black Yearsbegan, which the Elves call the Days of Flight. In that time many of the Elves ofMiddle-earth fled to Lindon and thence over the seas never to return; and manywere destroyed by Sauron and his servants. But in Lindon Gil-galad still
maintained his power, and Sauron dared not as yet to pass the Mountains of EredLuin nor to assail the Havens; and Gil-galad was aided by the Numenoreans.Elsewhere Sauron reigned, and those who would be free took refuge in thefastnesses of wood and mountain, and ever fear pursued them. In the east andsouth well nigh all Men were under his dominion, and they grew strong in thosedays and built many towns and walls of stone, and they were numerous andfierce in war and armed with iron. To them Sauron was both king and god; andthey feared him exceedingly, for he surrounded his abode with fire.
Yet there came at length a stay in the onslaught of Sauron upon the westlands.For, as is told in the Akallabeth, he was challenged by the might of Numenor. Sogreat was the power and splendour of the Numenoreans in the noontide of theirrealm that the servants of Sauron would not withstand them, and hoping toaccomplish by cunning what he could not achieve by force, he left Middle-earthfor a while and went to Numenor as a hostage of Tar-Calion the King. And therehe abode, until at the last by his craft he had corrupted the hearts of most of thatpeople, and set them at war with the Valar, and so compassed their ruin, as hehad long desired. But that ruin was more terrible than Sauron had foreseen, forhe had forgotten the might of the Lords of the West in their anger. The world wasbroken, and the land was swallowed up, and the seas rose over it, and Sauronhimself went down into the abyss. But his spirit arose and fled back on a darkwind to Middle-earth, seeking a home. There he found that the power of Gil-galad had grown great in the years of his absence, and it was spread now overwide regions of the north and west, and had passed beyond the Misty Mountainsand the Great River even to the borders of Greenwood the Great, and wasdrawing nigh to the strong places where once he had dwelt secure. Then Sauronwithdrew to his fortress in the Black Land and meditated war.
In that time those of the Numenoreans who were saved from destruction fledeastward, as is told in the Akallabeth. The chief of these were Elendil the Talland his sons, Isildur and Anarion. Kinsmen of the King they were, descendantsof Elros, but they had been unwilling to listen to Sauron, and had refused tomake war on the Lords of the West. Manning their ships with all who remainedfaithful they forsook the land of Numenor ere ruin came upon it. They weremighty men and their ships were strong and tall, but the tempests overtook them,and they were borne aloft on hills of water even to the clouds, and theydescended upon Middle-earth like birds of the storm.
Elendil was cast up by the waves in the land of Lindon, and he was befriendedby Gil-galad. Thence he passed up the River Lhun, and beyond Ered Luin heestablished his realm, and his people dwelt in many places in Eriador about thecourses of the Lhun and the Baranduin; but his chief city was at Annuminas
beside the water of Lake Nenuial. At Fornost upon the North Downs also theNumenoreans dwelt, and in Cardolan, and in the hills of Rhudaur; and towersthey raised upon Emyn Beraid and upon Amon Sul; and there remain manybarrows and ruined works in those places, but the towers of Emyn Beraid stilllook towards the sea.
Isildur and Anarion were borne away southwards, and at the last they broughttheir ships up the Great River Anduin, that flows out of Rhovanion into thewestern sea in the Bay of Belfalas; and they established a realm in those landsthat were after called Gondor, whereas the Northern Kingdom was named Arnor.Long before in the days of their power the mariners of Numenor had establisheda haven and strong places about the mouths of Anduin, in despite of Sauron inthe Black Land that lay nigh upon the east. In the later days to this haven cameonly the Faithful of Numenor, and many therefore of the folk of the coastlands inthat region were in whole or in part akin to the Elf-friends and the people ofElendil, and they welcomed his sons. The chief city of this southern realm wasOsgiliath, through the midst of which the Great River flowed; and theNumenoreans built there a great bridge, upon which there were towers andhouses of stone wonderful to behold, and tall ships came up out of the sea to thequays of the city. Other strong places they built also upon either hand: MinasIthil, the Tower of the Rising Moon, eastward upon a shoulder of the Mountainsof Shadow as a threat to Mordor; and to the westward Minas Anor, the Tower ofthe Setting Sun, at the feet of Mount Mindolluin, as a shield against the wildmen of the dales. In Minas Ithil was the house of Isildur, and in Minas Anor thehouse of Anarion, but they shared the realm between them and their throneswere set side by side in the Great Hall of Osgiliath. These were the chiefdwellings of the Numenoreans in Gondor, but other works marvellous and strongthey built in the land in the days of their power, at the Argonath, and atAglarond, and at Erech; and in the circle of Angrenost, which Men calledIsengard, they made the Pinnacle of Orthanc of unbreakable stone.
Many treasures and great heirlooms of virtue and wonder the Exiles hadbrought from Numenor; and of these the most renowned were the Seven Stonesand the White Tree. The White Tree was grown from the fruit of Nimloth theFair that stood in the courts of the King at Armenelos in Numenor, ere Sauronburned it; and Nimloth was in its turn descended from the Tree of Tirion, thatwas an image of the Eldest of Trees, White Telperion which Yavanna caused togrow in the land of the Valar. The Tree, memorial of the Eldar and of the light ofValinor, was planted in Minas Ithil before the house of Isildur, since he it wasthat had saved the fruit from destruction; but the Stones were divided.
Three Elendil took, and his sons each two. Those of Elendil were set in towers
upon Emyn Beraid, and upon Amon Sul, and in the city of Annuminas. Butthose of his sons were at Minas Ithil and Minas Anor, and at Orthanc and inOsgiliath. Now these Stones had this virtue that those who looked therein mightperceive in them things far off, whether in place or in time. For the most partthey revealed only things near to another kindred Stone, for the Stones eachcalled to each; but those who possessed great strength of will and of mind mightlearn to direct their gaze whither they would. Thus the Numenoreans were awareof many things that their enemies wished to conceal, and little escaped theirvigilance in the days of their might.
It is said that the towers of Emyn Beraid were not built indeed by the Exiles ofNumenor, but were raised by Gilgalad for Elendil, his friend; and the SeeingStone of Emyn Beraid was set in Elostirion, the tallest of the towers. ThitherElendil would repair, and thence he would gaze out over the sundering seas,when the yearning of exile was upon him; and it is believed that thus he would atwhiles see far away even the Tower of Avallone upon Eressea, where the Master-stone abode, and yet abides. These stones were gifts of the Eldar to Amandil,father of Elendil, for the comfort of the Faithful of Numenor in their dark days,when the Elves might come no longer to that land under the shadow of Sauron.They were called the Palantiri, those that watch from afar; but all those that werebrought to Middle-earth long ago were lost.
Thus the Exiles of Numenor established their realms in Arnor and in Gondor;but ere many years had passed it became manifest that their enemy, Sauron, hadalso returned. He came in secret, as has been told, to his ancient kingdom ofMordor beyond the Ephel Duath, the Mountains of Shadow, and that countrymarched with Gondor upon the east. There above the valley of Gorgoroth wasbuilt his fortress vast and strong, Barad-dur, the Dark Tower; and there was afiery mountain in that land that the Elves named Orod-ruin. Indeed for thatreason Sauron had set there his dwelling long before, for he used the fire thatwelled there from the heart of the earth in his sorceries and in his forging; and inthe midst of the Land of Mordor he had fashioned the Ruling Ring. There nowhe brooded in the dark, until he had wrought for himself a new shape; and it wasterrible, for his fair semblance had departed for ever when he was cast into theabyss at the drowning of Numenor. He took up again the great Ring and clothedhimself in power; and the malice of the Eye of Sauron few even of the greatamong Elves and Men could endure.
Now Sauron prepared war against the Eldar and the Men of Westernesse, andthe fires of the Mountain were wakened again. Wherefore seeing the smoke of
Orodruin from afar, and perceiving that Sauron had returned, the Numenoreansnamed that mountain anew Amon Amarth, which is Mount Doom. And Saurongathered to him great strength of his servants out of the east and the south; andamong them were not a few of the high race of Numenor. For in the days of thesojourn of Sauron in that land the hearts of well nigh all its people had beenturned towards darkness. Therefore many of those who sailed east in that timeand made fortresses and dwellings upon the coasts were already bent to his will,and they served him still gladly in Middle-earth. But because of the power ofGil-galad these renegades, lords both mighty and evil, for the most part took uptheir abodes in the southlands far away; yet two there were, Herumor and Fuinur,who rose to power among the Haradrim, a great and cruel people that dwelt inthe wide lands south of Mordor beyond the mouths of Anduin.
When therefore Sauron saw his time he came with great force against the newrealm of Gondor, and he took Minas Ithil, and he destroyed the White Tree ofIsildur that grew there. But Isildur escaped, and taking with him a seedling of theTree he went with his wife and his sons by ship down the River, and they sailedfrom the mouths of Anduin seeking Elendil. Meanwhile Anarion held Osgiliathagainst the Enemy, and for that time drove him back to the mountains; butSauron gathered his strength again, and Anarion knew that unless help shouldcome his kingdom would not long stand.
Now Elendil and Gil-galad took counsel together, for they perceived thatSauron would grow too strong and would overcome all his enemies one by one,if they did not unite against him. Therefore they made that League which iscalled the Last Alliance, and they marched east into Middle-earth gathering agreat host of Elves and Men; and they halted for a while at Imladris. It is saidthat the host that was there assembled was fairer and more splendid in arms thanany that has since been seen in Middle-earth, and none greater has beenmustered since the host of the Valar went against Thangorodrim.
From Imladris they crossed the Misty Mountains by many passes and marcheddown the River Anduin, and so came at last upon the host of Sauron onDagorlad, the Battle Plain, which lies before the gate of the Black Land. Allliving things were divided in that day, and some of every kind, even of beastsand birds, were found in either host, save the Elves only. They alone wereundivided and followed Gil-galad. Of the Dwarves few fought upon either side;but the kindred of Durin of Moria fought against Sauron.
The host of Gil-galad and Elendil had the victory, for the might of the Elveswas still great in those days, and the Numenoreans were strong and tall, andterrible in their wrath. Against Aeglos the spear of Gil-galad none could stand;and the sword of Elendil filled Ores and Men with fear, for it shone with the
light of the sun and of the moon, and it was named Narsil.
Then Gil-galad and Elendil passed into Mordor and encompassed thestronghold of Sauron; and they laid siege to it for seven years, and sufferedgrievous loss by fire and by the darts and bolts of the Enemy, and Sauron sentmany sorties against them. There in the valley of Gorgoroth Anarion son ofElendil was slain, and many others. But at the last the siege was so strait thatSauron himself came forth; and he wrestled with Gil-galad and Elendil, and theyboth were slain, and the sword of Elendil broke under him as he fell. But Sauronalso was thrown down, and with the hilt-shard of Narsil Isildur cut the RulingRing from the hand of Sauron and took it for his own. Then Sauron was for thattime vanquished, and he forsook his body, and his spirit fled far away and hid inwaste places; and he took no visible shape again for many long years.
Thus began the Third Age of the World, after the Eldest Days and the BlackYears; and there was still hope in that time and the memory of mirth, and forlong the White Tree of the Eldar flowered in the courts of the Kings of Men, forthe seedling which he had saved Isildur planted in the citadel of Anor in memoryof his brother, ere he departed from Gondor. The servants of Sauron were routedand dispersed, yet they were not wholly destroyed; and though many Men turnednow from evil and became subject to the heirs of Elendil, yet many moreremembered Sauron in their hearts and hated the kingdoms of the West. TheDark Tower was levelled to the ground, yet its foundations remained, and it wasnot forgotten. The Numenoreans indeed set a guard upon the land of Mordor, butnone dared dwell there because of the terror of the memory of Sauron, andbecause of the Mountain of Fire that stood nigh to Barad-dur; and the valley ofGorgoroth was filled with ash. Many of the Elves and many of the Numenoreansand of Men who were their allies had perished in the Battle and the Siege; andElendil the Tall and Gil-galad the High King were no more. Never again wassuch a host assembled, nor was there any such league of Elves and Men; for afterElendil’s day the two kindreds became estranged.
The Ruling Ring passed out of the knowledge even of the Wise in that age; yetit was not unmade. For Isildur would not surrender it to Elrond and Cirdan whostood by. They counselled him to cast it into the fire of Orodruin nigh at hand, inwhich it had been forged, so that it should perish, and the power of Sauron be forever diminished, and he should remain only as a shadow of malice in thewilderness. But Isildur refused this counsel, saying: This I will have as weregildfor my father’s death, and my brother’s. Was it not I that dealt the Enemy hisdeath-blow?’ And the Ring that he held seemed to him exceedingly fair to look
on; and he would not suffer it to be destroyed. Taking it therefore he returned atfirst to Minas Anor, and there planted the White Tree in memory of his brotherAnarion. But soon he departed, and after he had given counsel to Meneldil, hisbrother’s son, and had committed to him the realm of the south, he bore away theRing, to be an heirloom of his house, and marched north from Gondor by theway that Elendil had come; and he forsook the South Kingdom, for he purposedto take up his father’s realm in Eriador, far from the shadow of the Black Land.
But Isildur was overwhelmed by a host of Ores that lay in wait in the MistyMountains; and they descended upon him at unawares in his camp between theGreenwood and the Great River, nigh to Loeg Ningloron, the Gladden Fields, forhe was heedless and set no guard, deeming that all his foes were overthrown.There well nigh all his people were slain, and among them were his three eldersons, Elendur, Aratan, and Ciryon; but his wife and his youngest son, Valandil,he had left in Imladris when he went to the war. Isildur himself escaped bymeans of the Ring, for when he wore it he was invisible to all eyes; but the Oreshunted him by scent and slot, until he came to the River and plunged in. Therethe Ring betrayed him and avenged its maker, for it slipped from his finger as heswam, and it was lost in the water. Then the Ores saw him as he laboured in thestream, and they shot him with many arrows, and that was his end. Only three ofhis people came ever back over the mountains after long wandering; and of theseone was Ohtar his esquire, to whose keeping he had given the shards of thesword of Elendil.
Thus Narsil came in due time to the hand of Valandil, Isildur’s heir, inImladris; but the blade was broken and its light was extinguished, and it was notforged anew. And Master Elrond foretold that this would not be done until theRuling Ring should be found again and Sauron should return; but the hope ofElves and Men was that these things might never come to pass.
Valandil took up his abode in Annuminas, but his folk were diminished, andof the Numenoreans and of the Men of Eriador there remained now too few topeople the land or to maintain all the places that Elendil had built; in Dagorlad,and in Mordor, and upon the Gladden Fields many had fallen. And it came topass after the days of Earendur, the seventh king that followed Valandil, that theMen of Westernesse, the Dunedain of the North, became divided into pettyrealms and lordships, and their foes devoured them one by one. Ever theydwindled with the years, until their glory passed, leaving only green mounds inthe grass. At length naught was left of them but a strange people wanderingsecretly in the wild, and other men knew not their homes nor the purpose of theirjourneys, and save in Imladris, in the house of Elrond, their ancestry wasforgotten. Yet the shards of the sword were cherished during many lives of Men
by the heirs of Isildur; and their line, from father to son, remained unbroken.
In the south the realm of Gondor endured, and for a time its splendour grew,until it recalled the wealth and majesty of Numenor ere it fell. High towers thepeople of Gondor built, and strong places, and havens of many ships; and theWinged Crown of the Kings of Men was held in awe by people of many landsand tongues. For many a year the White Tree grew before the King’s house inMinas Anor, the seed of that tree which Isildur brought out of the deeps of thesea from Numenor; and the seed before that came from Avallone, and before thatfrom Valinor in the Day before days when the world was young.
Yet at the last, in the wearing of the swift years of Middle-earth, Gondorwaned, and the line of Meneldil son of Anarion failed. For the blood of theNumenoreans became much mingled with that of other men, and their power andwisdom was diminished, and their life-span was shortened, and the watch uponMordor slumbered. And in the days of Telemnar, the third and twentieth of theline of Meneldil, a plague came upon dark winds out of the east, and it smote theKing and his children, and many of the people of Gondor perished. Then theforts on the borders of Mordor were deserted, and Minas Ithil was emptied of itspeople; and evil entered again into the Black Land secretly, and the ashes ofGorgoroth were stirred as by a cold wind, for dark shapes gathered there. It issaid that these were indeed theUlairi, whom Sauron called the Nazgul, the NineRingwraiths that had long remained hidden, but returned now to prepare theways of their Master, for he had begun to grow again.
And in the days of Earnil they made their first stroke, and they came by nightout of Mordor over the passes of the Mountains of Shadow, and took Minas Ithilfor their abode; and they made it a place of such dread that none dared to lookupon it. Thereafter it was called Minas Morgul, the Tower of Sorcery; and MinasMorgul was ever at war with Minas Anor in the west. Then Osgiliath, which inthe waning of the people had long been deserted, became a place of ruins and acity of ghosts. But Minas Anor endured, and it was named anew Minas Tirith,the Tower of Guard; for there the kings caused to be built in the citadel a whitetower, very tall and fair, and its eye was upon many lands. Proud still and strongwas that city, and in it the White Tree still flowered for a while before the houseof the Kings; and there the remnant of the Numenoreans still defended thepassage of the River against the terrors of Minas Morgul and against all theenemies of the West, Ores and monsters and evil Men; and thus the lands behindthem, west of Anduin, were protected from war and destruction.
Still Minas Tirith endured after the days of Earnur, son of Earnil, and the lastKing of Gondor. He it was that rode alone to the gates of Minas Morgul to meetthe challenge of the Morgul-lord; and he met him in single combat, but he was
betrayed by the Nazgul and taken alive into the city of torment, and no livingman saw him ever again. Now Earnur left no heir, but when the line of the Kingsfailed the Stewards of the house of Mardil the Faithful ruled the city and its ever-shrinking realm; and the Rohirrim, the Horsemen of the North, came and dweltin the green land of Rohan, which before was named Calenardhon and was a partof the kingdom of Gondor; and the Rohirrim aided the Lords of the City in theirwars. And northward, beyond the Falls of Rauros and the Gates of Argonath,there were as yet other defences, powers more ancient of which Men knew little,against whom the things of evil did not dare to move, until in the ripening oftime their dark lord, Sauron, should come forth again. And until that time wascome, never again after the days of Earnil did the Nazgul dare to cross the Riveror to come forth from their city in shape visible to Men.
In all the days of the Third Age, after the fall of Gil-galad, Master Elrondabode in Imladris, and he gathered there many Elves, and other folk of wisdomand power from among all the kindreds of Middle-earth, and he preservedthrough many lives of Men the memory of all that had been fair; and the houseof Elrond was a refuge for the weary and the oppressed, and a treasury of goodcounsel and wise lore. In that house were harboured the Heirs of Isildur, inchildhood and old age, because of the kinship of their blood with Elrond himself,and because he knew in his wisdom that one should come of their line to whom agreat part was appointed in the last deeds of that Age. And until that time camethe shards of Elendil’s sword were given into the keeping of Elrond, when thedays of the Dunedain darkened and they became a wandering people.
In Eriador Imladris was the chief dwelling of the High Elves; but at the GreyHavens of Lindon there abode also a remnant of the people of Gil-galad theElvenking. At times they would wander into the lands of Eriador, but for themost part they dwelt near the shores of the sea, building and tending the elven-ships wherein those of the Firstborn who grew weary of the world set sail intothe uttermost West. Cirdan the Shipwright was lord of the Havens and mightyamong the Wise.
Of the Three Rings that the Elves had preserved unsullied no open word wasever spoken among the Wise, and few even of the Eldar knew where they werebestowed. Yet after the fall of Sauron their power was ever at work, and wherethey abode there mirth also dwelt and all things were unstained by the griefs oftime. Therefore ere the Third Age was ended the Elves perceived that the Ringof Sapphire was with Elrond, in the fair valley of Rivendell, upon whose housethe stars of heaven most brightly shone; whereas the Ring of Adamant was in the
Land of Lorien where dwelt the Lady Galadriel. A queen she was of thewoodland Elves, the wife of Celeborn of Doriath, yet she herself was of theNoldor and remembered the Day before days in Valinor, and she was themightiest and fairest of all the Elves that remained in Middle-earth. But the RedRing remained hidden until the end, and none save Elrond and Galadriel andCirdan knew to whom it had been committed.
Thus it was that in two domains the bliss and beauty of the Elves remainedstill undiminished while that Age endured: in Imladris; and in Lothlorien, thehidden land between Celebrant and Anduin, where the trees bore flowers of goldand no Ore or evil thing dared ever come. Yet many voices were heard amongthe Elves foreboding that, if Sauron should come again, then either he wouldfind the Ruling Ring that was lost, or at the best his enemies would discover itand destroy it; but in either chance the powers of the Three must then fail and allthings maintained by them must fade, and so the Elves should pass into thetwilight and the Dominion of Men begin.
And so indeed it has since befallen: the One and the Seven and the Nine aredestroyed; and the Three have passed away, and with them the Third Age isended, and the Tales of the Eldar in Middle-earth draw to their close. Those werethe Fading Years, and in them the last flowering of the Elves east of the Seacame to its winter. In that time the Noldor walked still in the Hither Lands,mightiest and fairest of the children of the world, and their tongues were stillheard by mortal ears. Many things of beauty and wonder remained on earth inthat time, and many things also of evil and dread: Ores there were and trolls anddragons and fell beasts, and strange creatures old and wise in the woods whosenames are forgotten; Dwarves still laboured in the hills and wrought with patientcraft works of metal and stone that none now can rival. But the Dominion ofMen was preparing and all things were changing, until at last the Dark Lordarose in Mirkwood again.
Now of old the name of that forest was Greenwood the Great, and its widehalls and aisles were the haunt of many beasts and of birds of bright song; andthere was the realm of King Thranduil under the oak and the beech. But aftermany years, when well nigh a third of that age of the world had passed, adarkness crept slowly through the wood from the southward, and fear walkedthere in shadowy glades; fell beasts came hunting, and cruel and evil creatureslaid there their snares.
Then the name of the forest was changed and Mirkwood it was called, for thenightshade lay deep there, and few dared to pass through, save only in the northwhere ThranduiTs people still held the evil at bay. Whence it came few couldtell, and it was long ere even the Wise could discover it. It was the shadow of
Sauron and the sign of his return. For coming out of the wastes of the East hetook up his abode in the south of the forest, and slowly he grew and took shapethere again; in a dark hill he made his dwelling and wrought there his sorcery,and all folk feared the Sorcerer of Dol Guldur, and yet they knew not at first howgreat was their peril.
Even as the first shadows were felt in Mirkwood there appeared in the west ofMiddle-earth the Istari, whom Men called the Wizards. None knew at that timewhence they were, save Cirdan of the Havens, and only to Elrond and toGaladriel did he reveal that they came over the Sea. But afterwards it was saidamong the Elves that they were messengers sent by the Lords of the West tocontest the power of Sauron, if he should arise again, and to move Elves andMen and all living things of good will to valiant deeds. In the likeness of Menthey appeared, old but vigorous, and they changed little with the years, and agedbut slowly, though great cares lay on them; great wisdom they had, and manypowers of mind and hand. Long they journeyed far and wide among Elves andMen, and held converse also with beasts and with birds; and the peoples ofMiddle-earth gave to them many names, for their tme names they did not reveal.Chief among them were those whom the Elves called Mithrandir and Curunir,but Men in the North named Gandalf and Saruman. Of these Curunir was theeldest and came first, and after him came Mithrandir and Radagast, and others ofthe Istari who went into the east of Middle-earth, and do not come into thesetales. Radagast was the friend of all beasts and birds; but Curunir went mostamong Men, and he was subtle in speech and skilled in all the devices ofsmithcraft. Mithrandir was closest in counsel with Elrond and the Elves. Hewandered far in the North and West and made never in any land any lastingabode; but Curunir journeyed into the East, and when he returned he dwelt atOrthanc in the Ring of Isengard, which the Numenoreans made in the days oftheir power.
Ever most vigilant was Mithrandir, and he it was that most doubted thedarkness in Mirkwood, for though many deemed that it was wrought by theRingwraiths, he feared that it was indeed the first shadow of Sauron returning;and he went to Dol Guldur, and the Sorcerer fled from him, and there was awatchful peace for a long while. But at length the Shadow returned and its powerincreased; and in that time was first made the Council of the Wise that is calledthe White Council, and therein were Elrond and Galadriel and Cirdan, and otherlords of the Eldar, and with them were Mithrandir and Curunir. And Curunir(that was Saruman the White) was chosen to be their chief, for he had moststudied the devices of Sauron of old. Galadriel indeed had wished thatMithrandir should be the head of the Council, and Saruman begrudged them that,
for his pride and desire of mastery was grown great; but Mithrandir refused theoffice, since he would have no ties and no allegiance, save to those who senthim, and he would abide in no place nor be subject to any summons. ButSaruman now began to study the lore of the Rings of Power, their making andtheir history.
Now the Shadow grew ever greater, and the hearts of Elrond and Mithrandirdarkened. Therefore on a time Mithrandir at great peril went again to Dol Guldurand the pits of the Sorcerer, and he discovered the truth of his fears, and escaped.And returning to Elrond he said:
True, alas, is our guess. This is not one of theUlairi, as many have longsupposed. It is Sauron himself who has taken shape again and now grows apace;and he is gathering again all the Rings to his hand; and he seeks ever for news ofthe One, and of the Heirs of Isildur, if they live still on earth.’
And Elrond answered: Tn the hour that Isildur took the Ring and would notsurrender it, this doom was wrought, that Sauron should return.’
‘Yet the One was lost,’ said Mithrandir, ‘and while it still lies hid, we canmaster the Enemy, if we gather our strength and tarry not too long.’
Then the White Council was summoned; and Mithrandir urged them to swiftdeeds, but Curunir spoke against him, and counselled them to wait yet and towatch.
‘For I believe not,’ said he, ‘that the One will ever be found again in Middle-earth. Into Anduin it fell, and long ago, I deem, it was rolled to the Sea. There itshall lie until the end, when all this world is broken and the deeps are removed.’
Therefore naught was done at that time, though Elrond’s heart misgave him,and he said to Mithrandir: ‘Nonetheless I forebode that the One will yet befound, and then war will arise again, and in that war this Age will be ended.Indeed in a second darkness it will end, unless some strange chance deliver usthat my eyes cannot see.’
‘Many are the strange chances of the world,’ said Mithrandir, ‘and help oftshall come from the hands of the weak when the Wise falter.’
Thus the Wise were troubled, but none as yet perceived that Curunir hadturned to dark thoughts and was already a traitor in heart: for he desired that heand no other should find the Great Ring, so that he might wield it himself andorder all the world to his will. Too long he had studied the ways of Sauron inhope to defeat him, and now he envied him as a rival rather than hated his works.And he deemed that the Ring, which was Sauron’s, would seek for its master ashe became manifest once more; but if he were driven out again, then it would liehid. Therefore he was willing to play with peril and let Sauron be for a time,hoping by his craft to forestall both his friends and the Enemy, when the Ring
should appear.
He set a watch upon the Gladden Fields; but soon he discovered that theservants of Dol Guldur were searching all the ways of the River in that region.Then he perceived that Sauron also had learned of the manner of Isildur’s end,and he grew afraid and withdrew to Isengard and fortified it; and ever he probeddeeper into the lore of the Rings of Power and the art of their forging. But hespoke of none of this to the Council, hoping still that he might be the first to hearnews of the Ring. He gathered a great host of spies, and many of these werebirds; for Radagast lent him his aid, divining naught of his treachery, anddeeming that this was but part of the watch upon the Enemy.
But ever the shadow in Mirkwood grew deeper, and to Dol Guldur evil thingsrepaired out of all the dark places of the world; and they were united again underone will, and their malice was directed against the Elves and the survivors ofNumenor. Therefore at last the Council was again summoned and the lore of theRings was much debated; but Mithrandir spoke to the Council, saying:
‘It is not needed that the Ring should be found, for while it abides on earthand is not unmade, still the power that it holds will live, and Sauron will growand have hope. The might of the Elves and the Elf-friends is less now than ofold. Soon he will be too strong for you, even without the Great Ring; for he rulesthe Nine, and of the Seven he has recovered three. We must strike.’
To this Curunir now assented, desiring that Sauron should be thrust from DolGuldur, which was nigh to the River, and should have leisure to search there nolonger. Therefore, for the last time, he aided the Council, and they put forth theirstrength; and they assailed Dol Guldur, and drove Sauron from his hold, andMirkwood for a brief while was made wholesome again.
But their stroke was too late. For the Dark Lord had foreseen it, and he hadlong prepared all his movements; and the Ulairi, his Nine Servants, had gonebefore him to make ready for his coming. Therefore his flight was but a feint,and he soon returned, and ere the Wise could prevent him he re-entered hiskingdom in Mordor and reared once again the dark towers of Barad-dur. And inthat year the White Council met for the last time, and Curunir withdrew toIsengard, and took counsel with none save himself.
Ores were mustering, and far to the east and the south the wild peoples werearming. Then in the midst of gathering fear and the rumour of war theforeboding of Elrond was proved true, and the One Ring was indeed foundagain, by a chance more strange than even Mithrandir had foreseen; and it washidden from Curunir and from Sauron. For it had been taken from Anduin longere they sought for it, being found by one of the small fisher-folk that dwelt bythe River, ere the Kings failed in Gondor; and by its finder it was brought
beyond search into dark hiding under the roots of the mountains. There it dwelt,until even in the year of the assault upon Dol Guldur it was found again, by awayfarer, fleeing into the depths of the earth from the pursuit of the Ores, andpassed into a far distant country, even to the land of the Periannath, the LittlePeople, the Halflings, who dwelt in the west of Eriador. And ere that day theyhad been held of small account by Elves and by Men, and neither Sauron nor anyof the Wise save Mithrandir had in all their counsels given thought to them.
Now by fortune and his vigilance Mithrandir first learned of the Ring, ereSauron had news of it; yet he was dismayed and in doubt. For too great was theevil power of this thing for any of the Wise to wield, unless like Curunir hewished himself to become a tyrant and a dark lord in his turn; but neither could itbe concealed from Sauron for ever, nor could it be unmade by the craft of theElves. Therefore with the help of the Diinedain of the North Mithrandir set awatch upon the land of the Periannath and bided his time. But Sauron had manyears, and soon he heard rumour of the One Ring, which above all things hedesired, and he sent forth the Nazgul to take it. Then war was kindled, and inbattle with Sauron the Third Age ended even as it had begun.
But those who saw the things that were done in that time, deeds of valour andwonder, have elsewhere told the tale of the War of the Ring, and how it endedboth in victory unlooked for and in sorrow long foreseen. Here let it be said thatin those days the Heir of Isildur arose in the North, and he took the shards of thesword of Elendil, and in Imladris they were reforged; and he went then to war, agreat captain of Men. He was Aragorn son of Arathorn, the nine and thirtiethheir in the right line from Isildur, and yet more like to Elendil than any beforehim. Battle there was in Rohan, and Curunir the traitor was thrown down andIsengard broken; and before the City of Gondor a great field was fought, and theLord of Morgul, Captain of Sauron, there passed into darkness; and the Heir ofIsildur led the host of the West to the Black Gates of Mordor.
In that last battle were Mithrandir, and the sons of Elrond, and the King ofRohan, and lords of Gondor, and the Heir of Isildur with the Dunedain of theNorth. There at the last they looked upon death and defeat, and all their valourwas in vain; for Sauron was too strong. Yet in that hour was put to the proof thatwhich Mithrandir had spoken, and help came from the hands of the weak whenthe Wise faltered. For, as many songs have since sung, it was the Periannath, theLittle People, dwellers in hillsides and meadows, that brought them deliverance.
For Frodo the Halfling, it is said, at the bidding of Mithrandir took on himselfthe burden, and alone with his servant he passed through peril and darkness and
came at last in Sauron’s despite even to Mount Doom; and there into the Firewhere it was wrought he cast the Great Ring of Power, and so at last it wasunmade and its evil consumed.
Then Sauron failed, and he was utterly vanquished and passed away like ashadow of malice; and the towers of Baraddur crumbled in ruin, and at therumour of their fall many lands trembled. Thus peace came again, and a newSpring opened on earth; and the Heir of Isildur was crowned King of Gondorand Arnor, and the might of the Dunedain was lifted up and their glory renewed.In the courts of Minas Anor the White Tree flowered again, for a seedling wasfound by Mithrandir in the snows of Mindolluin that rose tall and white abovethe City of Gondor; and while it still grew there the Elder Days were not whollyforgotten in the hearts of the Kings.
Now all these things were achieved for the most part by the counsel andvigilance of Mithrandir, and in the last few days he was revealed as a lord ofgreat reverence, and clad in white he rode into battle; but not until the time camefor him to depart was it known that he had long guarded the Red Ring of Fire. Atthe first that Ring had been entrusted to Cirdan, Lord of the Havens; but he hadsurrendered it to Mithrandir, for he knew whence he came and whither at last hewould return.
Take now this Ring,’ he said; 'for thy labours and thy cares will be heavy, butin all it will support thee and defend thee from weariness. For this is the Ring ofFire, and herewith, maybe, thou shalt rekindle hearts to the valour of old in aworld that grows chill. But as for me, my heart is with the Sea, and I will dwellby the grey shores, guarding the Havens until the last ship sails. Then I shallawait thee.’
White was that ship and long was it a-building, and long it awaited the end ofwhich Cirdan had spoken. But when all these things were done, and the Heir ofIsildur had taken up the lordship of Men, and the dominion of the West hadpassed to him, then it was made plain that the power of the Three Rings also wasended, and to the Firstborn the world grew old and grey. In that time the last ofthe Noldor set sail from the Havens and left Middle-earth for ever. And latest ofall the Keepers of the Three Rings rode to the Sea, and Master Elrond took therethe ship that Cirdan had made ready. In the twilight of autumn it sailed out ofMithlond, until the seas of the Bent World fell away beneath it, and the winds ofthe round sky troubled it no more, and borne upon the high airs above the mistsof the world it passed into the Ancient West, and an end was come for the Eldarof story and of song.
X
L
1
a
NOTF. ON PRONUNCIATION
The following note is intended simply to clarify a few main features in the
pronunciation of names in the Elvish languages, and is by no means exhaustive.
For full information on the subject see The Lord of the Rings Appendix E.
CONSONANTS
C always has the value of k, never of s; thus Celeborn is ‘Keleborn’, not‘Seleborn’. In a few cases, as Tulkas, Kementari a k has been used in thespelling in this book.
CH always has the value of ch in Scotch loch or German buch, never that of chin English church. Examples are Carcharoth, Erchamion.
DH is always used to represent the sound of a voiced (‘soft’) th in English, thatis the th in then, not the th in thin. Examples are Maedhros, Aredhel,Haudh-en-Arwen.
G always has the sound of English g in get; thus Region, Eregion are notpronounced like English region, and the first syllable of Ginglith is as inEnglish begin, not as in gin.
Consonants written twice are pronounced long; thus Yavanna has the long n
heard in English unnamed, penknife, not the short n in unaimed, penny.
VOWELS
AI has the sound of English eye; thus the second syllable of Edain is likeEnglish dine, not Dane.
AU has the value of English ow in town; thus the first syllable of Aule is likeEnglish owl, and the first syllable of Sauron is like English sour, not sore.
El as in Teiglin has the sound of English grey.
IE should not be pronounced as in English piece, but with both the vowels iand e sounded, and run together; thus Ni-enna, not ‘Neena’.
UI as in Uinen has the sound of English ruin.
AE as in Aegnor, Nirnaeth, and OE as in Noegyth, Loeg, are combinations ofthe individual vowels, a-e, o-e, but ae may be pronounced in the same wayas ai, and oe as in English toy.
EA are not run together, but constitute two syllables; these combinations are
and written ea and eo (or, when they begin names, Ed and £o: Earendil,
EO Ednxve).
U in names like Hurin, Turin, Tuna should be pronounced oo; thus ‘Toorin’,not ‘Tyoorin’.
ER, before a consonant (as in Nerdanel, Cvrdan, Gurthang ) or at the end of aIR, word (as in Amur) should not be pronounced as in English fern, fir, fur, butUR as in English air, eer, oor.
E at the end of words is always pronounced as a distinct vowel, and in thisposition is written e. It is likewise always pronounced in the middle ofwords like Celeborn, Menegroth.
A circumflex accent in stressed monosyllables in Sindarin denotes theparticularly long vowel heard in such words (thus Hm Hurin); but in Adunaic(Numenorean) and Khuzdul (Dwarvish) names the circumflex is simply used todenote long vowels.
INDF.X OF NAMES
Since the number of names in the book is very large, this index provides, inaddition to page-references, a short statement concerning each person and place.These statements are not epitomes of all that is said in the text, and for most ofthe central figures in the narrative are kept extremely brief; but such an index isinevitably bulky, and I have reduced its size in various ways.
The chief of these concerns the fact that very often the English translation ofan Elvish name is also used as the name independently; thus for example thedwelling of King Thingol is called both Menegroth and The Thousand Caves’(and also both together). In most such cases I have combined the Elvish nameand its translated meaning under one entry, with the result that the page-references are not restricted to the name that appears as the heading (e.g., thoseunder Echoriath include those to ‘Encircling Mountains’). The Englishrenderings are given separate headings, but only with a simple direction to themain entry, and only if they occur independently. Words in inverted commas aretranslations; many of these occur in the text (as Tol Eressea The Lonely Isle’),but I have added a great many others. Information about some names that are nottranslated is contained in the Appendix.
With the many titles and formal expressions in English whose Elvish originalsare not given, such as The Elder King’ and The Two Kindreds’, I have beenselective, but the great majority are registered. The references are in intentioncomplete (and sometimes include pages where the subject of the entry occurs butis not actually mentioned by name) except in a very few cases where the nameoccurs very frequently indeed, as Beleriand, Valar. Here the word passim isused, but selected references are given to important passages; and in the entriesfor some of the Noldorin princes the many occurrences of the name that relateonly to their sons or their houses have been eliminated.
References to The Lord of the Rings are by title of the volume, book, andchapter.
Adanedhel ‘Elf-Man’, name given to Turin in Nargothrond.
Adunakhor ‘Lord of the West’, name taken by the twentieth King ofNumenor, the first to do so in the Adunaic (Numenorean) tongue; his namein Quenya was Herunumen.
Adurant The sixth and most southerly of the tributaries of Gelion inOssiriand. The name means ‘double stream’, referring to its divided courseabout the island of Tol Galen.
Aeglos ‘Snow-point’, the spear of Gil-galad.
Aegnor The fourth son of Finarfin, who with his brother Angrod held thenorthern slopes of Dorthonion; slain in the Dagor Bragollach. The namemeans ‘Fell Fire’.
Aelin-uial ‘Meres of Twilight’, where Aros flowed into Sirion.
Aerandir ‘Sea-wanderer’, one of the three mariners who accompaniedEarendil on his voyages.
Aerin A kinswoman of Hurin in Dor-lomin; taken as wife by Brodda theEasterling; aided Morwen after the Nirnaeth Arnoediad.
Aftercomers The Younger Children of Iluvatar, Men; translation of Hildor.Agarwaen ‘Blood-stained’, name given to himself by Turin when he cameto Nargothrond.
Aglarond ‘The Glittering Cavern’ of Helm’s Deep in Ered Nimrais (see TheTwo Towers III 8).
Aglon ‘The Narrow Pass’, between Dorthonion and the heights to the westof Himring.
Ainulindale ‘The Music of the Ainur’, also called The (Great) Music, The(Great) Song. Also the name of the account of Creation said to have beencomposed by Rumil of Tirion in the Elder Days.
Amur ‘The Holy Ones’ (singular Ainu); the first beings created by Iluvatar,the ‘order’ of the Valar and Maiar, made before Ea.
Akallabeth ‘The Downfallen’, Adunaic (Numenorean) word equivalent inmeaning to Quenya Atalante. Also the title of the account of the Downfallof Numenor.
Alcarinque ‘The Glorious’, name of a star.
Alcarondas The great ship of Ar-Pharazon in which he sailed to Aman.Aldaron ‘Lord of Trees’, a Quenya name of the Vala Orome; cf. Tauron.Aldudenie ‘Lament for the Two Trees’, made by a Vanyarin Elf namedElemmire.
Almaren The first abode of the Valar in Arda, before the second onslaughtof Melkor: an isle in a great lake in the midst of Middle-earth.
Alqualonde ‘Haven of the Swans’, the chief city and haven of the Teleri onthe shores of Aman.
Aman ‘Biessed, free from evil’, the name of the land in the West, beyondthe Great Sea, in which the Valar dwelt after they had left the Isle ofAlmaren. Often referred to as the Blessed Realm. Passim.
Amandil 'Lover of Arrian’; the last lord of Andunie in Numenor, descendantof Elros and father of Elendil; set out on a voyage to Valinor and did notreturn.
Amarie Vanyarin Elf, beloved of Finrod Felagund, who remained inValinor.
Amlach Son of Imlach son of Marach; a leader of dissension among theMen of Estolad who, repenting, took service with Maedhros.
Amon Amarth 'Mount Doom’, the name given to Orodruin when its firesawoke again after Sauron’s return from Numenor.
Amon Ereb 'The Lonely Hill’ (also simply Ereb ), between Ramdal and theriver Gelion in East Beleriand.
Amon Ethir 'The Hill of Spies’, raised by Finrod Felagund to the east of thedoors of Nargothrond.
Amon Gwareth The hill upon which Gondolin was built, in the midst of theplain of Tumladen.
Amon Obel A hill in the midst of the Forest of Brethil, on which was builtEphel Brandir.
Amon Rudh ‘The Bald Hill’, a lonely height in the lands south of Brethil;abode of Mim, and lair of Turin’s outlaw band.
Amon Sul ‘Hill of the Wind’, in the Kingdom of Arnor (‘Weathertop’ in TheLord of the Rings).
Amon Uilos Sindarin name of Oiolosse.
Amras Twin-brother of Amrod, youngest of the sons of Feanor; slain withAmrod in the attack on Earendil’s people at the Mouths of Sirion.
Amrod See Amras.
Anach Pass leading down from Taur-nu-Fuin (Dorthonion) at the westernend of Ered Gorgoroth.
Anadune ‘Westernesse’: name of Numenor in the Adunaic (Numenorean)tongue (see Numenor).
Anar Quenya name of the Sun.
Anarion Younger son of Elendil, who with his father and his brother Isildurescaped from the Drowning of Numenor and founded in Middle-earth theNumenorean realms in exile; lord of Minas Anor; slain in the siege ofBarad-dur.
Anarrima Name of a constellation.
Ancalagon Greatest of the winged dragons of Morgoth, destroyed byEarendil.
Andor 'The Land of Gift’: Numenor.
Andram 'The Long Wall’, name of the dividing fall running across
Beleriand.
Androth Caves in the hills of Mithrim where Tuor was fostered by the Grey-elves.
Anduin The Long River’, east of the Misty Mountains; referred to also asthe Great River and the River.
Andunie City and haven on the west coast of Numenor.
Anfauglir A name of the wolf Carcharoth, translated in the text as ‘Jaws ofThirst’.
Anfauglith Name of the plain of Ard-galen after its desolation by Morgothin the Battle of Sudden Flame; translated in the text as ‘the Gasping Dust’.Cf. Dor-nu-Fauglith.
Angainor The chain wrought by Aule with which Melkor was twice bound.Angband ‘Iron Prison, Hell of Iron’, the great dungeon-fortress of Morgothin the Northwest of Middle-earth. The Siege of Angband.
Anghabar ‘Iron-delvings’, a mine in the Encircling Mountains about theplain of Gondolin.
Anglachel The sword made from meteoritic iron that Thingol received fromEol and which he gave to Beleg; after its reforging for Turin namedGurthang.
Angrenost ‘Iron Fortress’, Numenorean fortress on the west borders ofGondor, afterwards inhabited by the wizard Curunir (Saruman); seeIsengard.
Angrim Father of Gorlim the Unhappy.
Angrist ‘Iron-cleaver’, the knife made by Telchar of Nogrod, taken fromCurufin by Beren and used by him to cut the Silmaril from Morgoth’scrown.
Angrod The third son of Finarfin, who with his brother Aegnor held thenorthern slopes of Dorthonion; slain in the Dagor Bragollach.
Anguirel Eol’s sword, made of the same metal as Anglachel.
Annael Grey-elf of Mithrim, fosterfather of Tuor.
Annatar ‘Lord of Gifts’, name given to himself by Sauron in the SecondAge, in that time when he appeared in a fair form among the Eldar whoremained in Middle-earth.
Annon-in-Gelydh ‘Gate of the Noldor’, entrance to a subterranean water¬course in the western hills of Dor-lomin, leading to Cirith Ninniach.Annuminas ‘Tower of the West’ (i.e. of Westernesse, Numenor); city of theKings of Arnor beside Lake Nenuial.
Anor See Minas Anor.
Apanonar ‘The Afterborn’, an Elvish name for Men.
Aradan Sindarin name of Malach, son of Marach.
Aragorn The thirty-ninth Heir of Isildur in the direct line; King of thereunited realms of Arnor and Gondor after the War of the Ring; weddedArwen, daughter of Elrond. Called the Heir of Isildur.
Araman Barren wasteland on the coast of Aman, between the Pelori and theSea, extending northward to the Helcaraxe.
Aranel Name of Dior Thingol’s Heir.
Aranruth ‘King’s Ire’, the name of Thingol’s sword. Aranruth survived theruin of Doriath and was possessed by the Kings of Numenor.
Aranwe Elf of Gondolin, father of Voronwe.
Aratari Second son of Isildur, slain with him at the Gladden Fields.
Aratar ‘The Exalted’, the eight Valar of greatest power.
Arathorn Father of Aragorn.
Arda ‘The Realm’, name of the Earth as the Kingdom of Manwe.
Ard-galen The great grassy plain north of Dorthonion, called after itsdesolation Anfauglith and Dor-nu-Fauglith. The name means ‘the GreenRegion’; cf. Calen-ardhon (Rohan).
Aredhel ‘Noble Elf’, the sister of Turgon of Gondolin, who was ensnaredby Eol in Nan Elmoth and bore to him Maeglin; called also Ar-Feiniel, theWhite Lady of the Noldor, the White Lady of Gondolin.
Ar-Feiniel See Aredhel.
Ar-Gimilzor Twenty-third King of Numenor, persecutor of the Elendili.Argonath ‘King-stones’, the Pillars of the Kings, great carvings of Isildurand Anarion on the Anduin at the entrance to the northern bounds ofGondor (see The Fellowship of the Ring II 9).
Arien A Maia, chosen by the Valar to guide the vessel of the Sun.
Armenelos City of the Kings in Numenor.
Arminas See Gelmir (2).
Arnor ‘Land of the King’, the northern realm of the Numenoreans inMiddle-earth, established by Elendil after his escape from the Drowning ofNumenor.
Aros The southern river of Doriath.
Arossiach The Fords of Aros, near the north-eastern edge of Doriath.Ar-Pharazon ‘The Golden’, twenty-fifth and last King of Numenor; namedin Quenya Tar-Calion; captor of Sauron, by whom he was seduced;commander of the great fleet that went against Aman.
Ar-Sakalthor Father of Ar-Gimilzor.
Arthad One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion.
Arvernien The coastlands of Middle-earth west of Sirion’s mouths. Cf.
Bilbo’s song at Rivendell: ‘Earendil was a mariner that tarried inArvernien...’ ( The Fellowship of the Ring II1).
Ar-Zimraphel See Miriel (2).
Ascar The most northerly of the tributaries of Gelion in Ossiriand(afterwards called Rathloriel ). The name means hushing, impetuous’.Astaldo The Valiant’, name of the Vala Tulkas.
Atalante The Downfallen’, Quenya word equivalent in meaning toAkallabeth.
Atanamir See Tar-Atanamir.
Atanatari 'Fathers of Men’; see Atani.
Atani The Second People’, Men (singular Atan). Since in Beleriand for along time the only Men known to the Noldor and Sindar were those of theThree Houses of the Elf-friends, this name (in the Sindarin form Adan,plural Edain) became specially associated with them, so that it was seldomapplied to other Men who came later to Beleriand, or who were reported tobe dwelling beyond the Mountains. But in the speech of Iluvatar (35) themeaning is ‘Men (in general)’.
Aule A Vala, one of the Aratar, the smith and master of crafts, spouse ofYavanna; and for his making of the Dwarves.
Avallone Haven and city of the Eldar on Tol Eressea, so named, accordingto the Akallabeth, ‘for it is of all cities the nearest to Valinor’.
Avari The Unwilling, the Refusers’, the name given to all those Elves whorefused to join the westward march from Cuivienen. See Eldar and DarkElves.
Avathar The Shadows’, the forsaken land on the coast of Aman south ofthe Bay of Eldamar, between the Pelori and the Sea, where Melkor metUngoliant.
Azaghal Lord of the Dwarves of Belegost; wounded Glaurung in theNirnaeth Arnoediad, and was killed by him.
Balanz The name of Beor the Old before he took service with Finrod.
Balar The great bay to the south of Beleriand into which the river Sirionflowed. Also the isle in the bay, said to have been the eastern horn of TolEressea that broke away, where Cirdan and Gil-galad dwelt after theNirnaeth Arnoediad.
Balrog ‘Demon of Might’, Sindarin form (Quenya Valarauko ) of the nameof the demons of fire that served Morgoth.
Barad-dur The Dark Tower’ of Sauron in Mordor.
Barad Eithel Tower of the Well’, the fortress of the Noldor at Eithel Sirion.
Bar ad Nimras 'White Horn Tower’, raised by Finrod Felagund on the capewest of Eglarest.
Baragund Father of Morwen the wife of Hurin; nephew of Barahir and oneof his twelve companions on Dorthonion.
Barahir Father of Beren; rescued Finrod Felagund in the Dagor Bragollach,and received from him his ring; slain on Dorthonion. For the later history ofthe ring of Barahir, which became an heirloom of the House of Isildur, seeThe Lord of the Rings Appendix A (I, iii).
Baran Elder son of Beor the Old.
Baranduin The Brown River’ in Eriador, flowing into the Sea south of theBlue Mountains; the Brandywine of the Shire in The Lord of the Rings.Bar-en-Danwedh ‘House of Ransom’, the name that Mim the Dwarf gaveto his dwelling on Amon Rudh when he yielded it to Turin.
Battles of Beleriand The first battle: The second battle (the Battle-under-Stars): see Dagor-nuin-Giliath. The third battle (the Glorious Battle): seeDagor Aglareb. The fourth battle (the Battle of Sudden Flame): see DagorBragollach. The fifth battle (Unnumbered Tears): see Nirnaeth Arnoediad.The Great Battle.
Bauglir A name of Morgoth: ‘the Constrained.
Beleg A great archer and chief of the marchwardens of Doriath; calledCuthalion ‘Strongbow’; friend and companion of Turin, by whom he wasslain.
Belegaer ‘The Great Sea’ of the West, between Middle-earth and Aman.Named Belegaer; but very frequently called the (Great) Sea, also theWestern Sea and the Great Water.
Belegost ‘Great Fortress’, one of the two cities of the Dwarves in the BlueMountains; translation into Sindarin of Dwarvish Gabilgathol. SeeMickleburg.
Belegund Father of Rian the wife of Huor; nephew of Barahir and one ofhis twelve companions on Dorthonion.
Beleriand The name was said to have signified ‘the country of Balar’, andto have been given at first to the lands about the mouths of Sirion that facedthe Isle of Balar. Later the name spread to include all the ancient coast ofthe Northwest of Middle-earth south of the Firth of Drengist, and all theinner lands south of Hithlum and eastwards to the feet of the BlueMountains, divided by the river Sirion into East and West Beleriand.Beleriand was broken in the turmoils at the end of the First Age, andinvaded by the sea, so that only Ossiriand (Lindon) remained.
Belfalas Region on the southern coast of Gondor looking on to the great
bay of the same name; Bay ofBelfalas
Belthil ‘Divine radiance’, the image of Telperion made by Turgon inGondolin.
Belthronding The bow of Beleg Cuthalion, which was buried with him.
Beor Called the Old; leader of the first Men to enter Beleriand; vassal ofFinrod Felagund; progenitor of the House of Beor (called also the EldestHouse of Men and The First House of the Edain ); see Balan. House of,People of, Beor
Bereg Grandson of Baran son of Beor the Old (this is not stated in the text);a leader of dissension among the Men of Estolad; went back over themountains into Eriador.
Beren Son of Barahir; cut a Silmaril from Morgoth’s crown to be the bride-price of Luthien Thingol’s daughter, and was slain by Carcharoth the wolfof Angband; but returning from the dead, alone of mortal Men, livedafterwards with Luthien on Tol Galen in Ossiriand, and fought with theDwarves at Sam Athrad. Great-grandfather of Elrond and Elros andancestor of the Numenorean Kings. Called also Camlost, Erchamion, andOne-hand.
Black Land See Mordor.
Black Sword See Mormegil.
Black Years
Blessed Realm See Aman.
Blue Mountains See Ered Luin and Ered Lindon.
Bor A chieftain of the Easterlings, follower with his three sons of Maedhrosand Maglor. Sons of Bor.
Borlach One of the three sons of Bor; slain with his brothers in the NirnaethArnoediad.
Borlad One of the three sons of Bor; see Borlach.
Boromir Great-grandson of Beor the Old, grandfather of Barahir father ofBeren; first lord of Ladros.
Boron Father of Boromir.
Borthand One of the three sons of Bor; see Borlach.
Bragollach See Dagor Bragollach.
Brandir Called the Lame; ruler of the People of Haleth after the death ofHandir his father; enamoured of Nienor; slain by Turin.
Bregolas Father of Baragund and Belegund; slain in the Dagor Bragollach.Bregor Father of Barahir and Bregolas.
Brethil The forest between the rivers Teiglin and Sirion, dwelling-place ofthe Haladin (the People of Haleth).
Bridge of Esgalduin See Iant Iaur.
Brilthor ‘Glittering Torrent’, the fourth of the tributaries of Gelion inOssiriand.
Brithiach The ford over Sirion north of the Forest of Brethil.
Brithombar The northern of the Havens of the Falas on the coast ofBeleriand.
Brithon The river that flowed into the Great Sea at Brithombar.
Brodda An Easterling in Hithlum after the Nirnaeth Arnoediad who took aswife Aerin, kinswoman of Hurin; slain by Turin.
Cabed-en-Aras Deep gorge in the river Teiglin, where Turin slew Glaurung,and where Nienor leapt to her death; see Cabed Naeramarth.
Cabed Naeramarth ‘Leap of Dreadful Doom’, name givento Cabed-en-Aras after Nienor leapt from its cliffs.
Calacirya ‘Cleft of Light’, the pass made in the mountains of the Pelori, inwhich was raised the green hill of Tuna.
Calaquendi ‘Elves of the Light’, those Elves who lived or had lived inAman (the High Elves). See Moriquendi and Dark Elves.
Calenardhon ‘The Green Province’, name of Rohan when it was thenorthern part of Gondor; cf. Ard-galen.
Camlost ‘Empty-handed’, name taken by Beren after his return to KingThingol without the Silmaril.
Caragdur The precipice on the north side of Amon Gwareth (the hill ofGondolin) from which Eol was cast to his death.
Caranthir The fourth son of Feanor, called the Dark; ‘the harshest of thebrothers and the most quick to anger’; ruled in Thargelion; slain in theassault on Doriath.
Carcharoth The great wolf of Angband that bit off the hand of Berenbearing the Silmaril; slain by Huan in Doriath. The name is translated in thetext as ‘the Red Maw’. Called also Anfauglir.
Cardolan Region in the south of Eriador, a part of the Kingdom of Arnor.Carnil Name of a (red) star.
Celeborn (1) ‘Tree of Silver’, name of the Tree of Tol Eressea, a scion ofGalathilion.
Celeborn (2) Elf of Doriath, kinsman of Thingol; wedded Galadriel andwith her remained in Middle-earth after the end of the First Age.
Celebrant ‘Silver Lode’, river running from Mirrormere through Lothoriento join the Anduin.
Celebrimbor ‘Hand of Silver’, son of Curufin, who remained in
Nargothrond when his father was expelled. In the Second Age greatest ofthe smiths of Eregion; maker of the Three Rings of the Elves; slain bySauron.
Celebrindal ‘Silverfoot’; see Idril.
Celebros 'Silver Foam’ or 'Silver Rain’, a stream in Brethil falling down toTeiglin near the Crossings.
Celegorm The third son of Feanor, called the Fair; until the DagorBragollach lord of the region of Himlad with Curufin his brother; dwelt inNargothrond and imprisoned Futhien; master of Huan the wolfhound; slainby Dior in Menegroth.
Celon River flowing southwest from the Hill of Himring, a tributary ofAros. The name means ‘stream flowing down from heights’.
Children of Iluvatar Also Children of Eru: translations of Hmi Iluvataro,Eruhmi; the Firstborn and the Followers, Elves and Men. Also TheChildren, Children of the Earth, Children of the World.
Cvrdan ‘The Shipwright’; Telerin Elf, lord of the Falas (coasts of WestBeleriand); at the destruction of the Havens after the Nirnaeth Arnoediadescaped with Gil-galad to the Isle of Balar; during the Second and ThirdAges keeper of the Grey Havens in the Gulf of Fhun; at the coming ofMithrandir entrusted to him Narya, the Ring of Fire.
Cirith Ninniach ‘Rainbow Cleft’, by which Tuor came to the Western Sea;see Annon-in-Gelydh.
Cirith Thoronath ‘Eagles’ Cleft’, a high pass in the mountains north ofGondolin, where Glorfindel fought with a Balrog and fell into the abyss.Cirth The Runes, first devised by Daeron of Doriath.
Ciryon Third son of Isildur, slain with him at the Gladden Fields.
Corollaire ‘The Green Mound’ of the Two Trees in Valinor; also calledEzellohar.
Crissaegrim The mountain-peaks south of Gondolin, where were the eyriesof Thorondor.
Crossings of Teiglin In the southwest of the Forest of Brethil, where the oldroad southward from the Pass of Sirion crossed the Teiglin.
Cuivienen ‘Water of Awakening’, the lake in Middle-earth where the firstElves awoke, and where they were found by Orome.
Culurien A name of Faurelin.
Curufin The fifth son of Feanor, called the Crafty; father of Celebrimbor.For the origin of his name see Feanor; and for his history see Celegorm.Curufinwe See Feanor.
Curunir ‘The one of cunning devices’, Elvish name of Saruman, one of the
Istari (Wizards).
Cuthalion ‘Strongbow’; see Beleg.
Daeron Minstrel and chief loremaster of King Thingol; deviser of the Cirth(Runes); enamoured of Luthien and twice betrayed her.
Dagnir One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion.
Dagnir Glaurunga ‘Glaurung’s Bane’, Turin.
Dagor Aglareb The Glorious Battle’, third of the great battles in the Warsof Beleriand.
Dagor Bragollach The Battle of Sudden Flame’ (also simply theBragollach ), fourth of the great battles in the Wars of Beleriand.
Dagorlad 'Battle Plain’, the place of the great battle north of Mordorbetween Sauron and the Last Alliance of Elves and Men at the end of theSecond Age.
Dagor-nuin-Giliath The Battle-under-Stars’, the second battle in the Warsof Beleriand, fought in Mithrim after the coming of Feanor to Middle-earth.Dairuin One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion.
Dark Elves In the language of Aman all Elves that did not cross the GreatSea were Dark Elves ( Moriquendi ), and the term is sometimes used thus,when Caranthir called Thingol a Dark Elf it was intended opprobriously,and was especially so, since Thingol had been to Aman ‘and was notaccounted among the Moriquendi’. But in the period of the Exile of theNoldor it was often used of the Elves of Middle-earth other than the Noldorand the Sindar, and is then virtually equivalent to Avari. Different again isthe title Dark Elf of the Sindarin Elf Eol, but Turgon no doubt meant thatE61 was of the Moriquendi.
Dark Lord, The The term is used of Morgoth, and of Sauron.
Days of Flight
Deathless Lands See Undying Lands.
Delduwath One of the later names of Dorthonion (Taur-nu-Fuin), meaning‘Horror of Night-shadow’.
Denethor Son of Lenwe; leader of the Nandorin Elves that came at last overthe Blue Mountains and dwelt in Ossiriand; slain on Amon Ereb in the FirstBattle of Beleriand.
Dimbar The land between the rivers Sirion and Mindeb.
Dimrost The falls of Celebros in the Forest of Brethil; translated in the textas ‘the Rainy Stair’. Afterwards called Nen Girith.
Dior Called Aranel, and also Eluchil ‘Thingol’s Heir’; son of Beren andLuthien and father of Elwing, Elrond’s mother; came to Doriath from
Ossiriand after the death of Thingol, and received the Silmaril after thedeath of Beren and Luthien; slain in Menegroth by the sons of Feanor.Dispossessed, The The House of Feanor.
Dol Guldur ‘Hill of Sorcery’, fastness of the Necromancer (Sauron) insouthern Mirkwood in the Third Age.
Dolmed ‘Wet Head’, a great mountain in the Ered Luin, near the Dwarf-cities of Nogrod and Belegost.
Dor Caranthir ‘Land of Caranthir’; see Thargelion.
Dor-Cuarthol ‘Land of Bow and Helm’, name of the country defended byBeleg and Turin from their lair on Amon Rudh.
Dor Daedeloth ‘Land of the Shadow of Horror’, the land of Morgoth in thenorth.
Dor Dmen ‘The Silent Land’, where nothing dwelt, between the upperwaters of Esgalduin and Aros.
Dor Firn-i-Guinar ‘Land of the Dead that Live’, name of that region inOssiriand where Beren and Luthien dwelt after their return.
Doriath ‘Land of the Fence’ (Dor lath), referring to the Girdle of Melian,earlier called Eglador; the kingdom of Thingol and Melian in the forests ofNeldoreth and Region, ruled from Menegroth on the river Esgalduin. Alsocalled the Hidden Kingdom.
Dorlas A Man of the Haladin in Brethil; went with Turin and Hunthor tothe attack on Glaurung, but withdrew in fear; slain by Brandir the Lame.The wife of Dorlas, not named.
Dor-lomin Region in the south of Hithlum, the territory of Fingon, given asa fief to the House of Hador; the home of Hurin and Morwen. The Lady ofDor-lomin : Morwen.
Dor-nu-Fauglith ‘Land under Choking Ash’; see Anfauglith.
Dorthonion ‘Land of Pines’, the great forested highlands on the northernborders of Beleriand, afterwards called Taur-nu-Fuin. Cf. Treebeard’s songin The Two Towers III 4: ‘To the pine-trees upon the highlands ofDorthonion I climbed in the Winter...’
Dragon-helm of Dor-lomin Heirloom of the House of Hador, worn byTurin; also called the Helm of Hador.
Dragons
Draugluin The great werewolf slain by Huan at Tol-in-Gaurhoth, and inwhose form Beren entered Angband.
Drengist The long firth that pierced Ered Lomin, the west-fence of Hithlum.Dry River The river that once flowed out under the Encircling Mountainsfrom the primeval lake where was afterwards Tumladen, the plain of
Gondolin.
Duilwen The fifth of the tributaries of Gelion in Ossiriand.
Dunedain ‘The Edain of the West’; see Numenoreans.
Dungortheb See Nan Dungortheb.
Durin Lord of the Dwarves of Khazad-dum (Moria).
Dwarf-road Road leading down into Beleriand from the cities of Nogrodand Belegost, and crossing Gelion at the ford of Sam Athrad.
Dwarrowdelf ‘Delving of the Dwarves’; translation of Khazaddum(Hadhodrond).
Dwarves Referring to the Petty-Dwarves: Seven Fathers of the Dwarves:For the Necklace of the Dwarves see Nauglamir. For the Seven Rings of theDwarves see Rings of Power. See also Naugrim.
Ed The World, the material Universe; Ed, meaning in Elvish ‘It is’ or ‘Let itbe’, was the word of Iluvatar when the World began its existence.
Earendil Called ‘Halfelven’, ‘the Blessed’, ‘the Bright’, and ‘the Mariner’;son of Tuor and Idril Turgon’s daughter; escaped from the sack of Gondolinand wedded Elwing daughter of Dior at the Mouths of Sirion; sailed withher to Aman and pleaded for help against Morgoth; set to sail the skies inhis ship Vingilot bearing the Silmaril that Beren and Luthien brought out ofAngband. The name means ‘Lover of the Sea’.
Earendur (1) A lord of Andunie in Numenor.
Earendur (2) Tenth King of Arnor.
Earnil Thirty-second King of Gondor.
Earnur Son of Earnil; last King of Gondor, in whom the line of Anarioncame to its end.
Earrame ‘Sea-wing’, the name of Tuor’s ship.
Earwen Daughter of Olwe of Alqualonde, Thingol’s brother; weddedFinarfin of the Noldor. From Earwen Finrod, Orodreth, Angrod, Aegnorand Galadriel had Telerin blood and were therefore allowed entry intoDoriath.
Easterlings Also called Swarthy Men; entered Beleriand from the East inthe time after the Dagor Bragollach, and fought on both sides in theNirnaeth Arnoediad; given Hithlum as a dwelling-place by Morgoth, wherethey oppressed the remnant of the People of Hador.
Echoing Mountains See Ered Lomin.
Echoriath ‘The Encircling Mountains’ about the plain of Gondolin.Ecthelion Elf-lord of Gondolin, who in the sack of the city slew and wasslain by Gothmog Lord of Balrogs.
Edain See Atani.
Edrahil Chief of the Elves of Nargothrond who accompanied Finrod andBeren on their quest, and died in the dungeons of Tol-in-Gaurhoth.
Eglador The former name of Doriath, before it was encompassed by theGirdle of Melian; probably connected with the name Eg lath.
Eglarest The southern of the Havens of the Falas on the coast of Beleriand.Eglath ‘The Forsaken People’, name given to themselves by the TelerinElves who remained in Beleriand seeking for Elwe (Thingol) when themain host of the Teleri departed to Aman.
Eilinel The wife of Gorlim the Unhappy.
Eithel Ivrin ‘Ivrin’s Well’, the source of the river Narog beneath EredWethrin.
Eithel Sirion ‘Sirion’s Well’, in the eastern face of Ered Wethrin, where wasthe great fortress of Fingolfin and Fingon (see Barad Eithel ).
Ekkaia Elvish name of the Outer Sea, encircling Arda; referred to also asthe Outer Ocean and the Encircling Sea.
Elbereth The usual name of Varda in Sindarin, ‘Star-Queen’; cf. Elentari.Eldalie ‘The Elven-folk’, used as equivalent to Eldar.
Eldamar ‘Elvenhome’, the region of Aman in which the Elves dwelt; alsothe great Bay of the same name.
Eldar According to Elvish legend the name Eldar ‘People of the Stars’ wasgiven to all the Elves by the Vala Orome. It came however to be used torefer only to the Elves of the Three Kindreds (Vanyar, Noldor, and Teleri)who set out on the great westward march from Cuivienen (whether or notthey remained in Middle-earth), and to exclude the Avari. The Elves ofAman, and all Elves who ever dwelt in Aman, were called the High Elves(Tareldar) and Elves of the Light ( Calaquendi ); see Dark Elves,Umanyar.Passim; see entry Elves.
Eldarin Of the Eldar; used in reference to the language(s) of the Eldar. Theoccurrences of the term in fact refer to Quenya, also called High Eldarinand High-elven; see Quenya.
Elder Days The First Age; also called the Eldest Days.
Elder King Manwe.
Eledhwen See Morwen.
Elemmire (1) Name of a star.
Elemmire (2) Vanyarin Elf, maker of the Aldudenie, the Lament for the TwoTrees.
Elende A name of Eldamar.
Elendil Called the Tall; son of Amandil, last lord of Andunie in Numenor,
descended from Earendil and Elwing but not of the direct line of the Kings;escaped with his sons Isildur and Anarion from the Drowning of Numenorand founded the Numenorean realms in Middle-earth; slain with Gil-galadin the overthrow of Sauron at the end of the Second Age. The name may beinterpreted either as 'Elf-friend’ (cf. Elendili)or as ‘Star-lover’. Heirs ofElendil.
Elendili ‘Elf-friends’, name given to those Numenoreans who were notestranged from the Eldar in the days of Tar-Ancalimon and later kings; alsocalled the Faithful.
Elendur Eldest son of Isildur, slain with him at the Gladden Fields.
Elenna A (Quenya) name of Numenor, ‘Starwards’, from the guidance ofthe Edain by Earendil on their voyage to Numenor at the beginning of theSecond Age.
Elentari ‘Star-Queen’, a name of Varda as maker of the Stars. She is calledthus in Galadriel’s lament in Lorien, The Fellowship of the Ring II 8. Cf.Elbereth, Tintalle.
Elenwe Wife of Turgon; perished in the crossing of the Helcaraxe.
Elerrma ‘Crowned with Stars’, a name of Taniquetil.
Elf-friends The Men of the Three Houses of Beor, Haleth, and Hador, theEdain. In the Akallabeth and in Of the Rings of Power used of thoseNumenoreans who were not estranged from the Eldar; see Elendili.Elostirion Tallest of the towers upon Emyn Beraid, in which the palantirwas placed.
Elrond Son of Earendil and Elwing, who at the end of the First Age choseto belong to the Firstborn, and remained in Middle-earth until the end of theThird Age; master of Imladris (Rivendell) and keeper of Vilya, the Ring ofAir, which he had received from Gil-galad. Called Master Elrond andElrond Half-elven. The name means ‘Star-dome’. Sons of Elrond.
Elros Son of Earendil and Elwing, who at the end of the First Age chose tobe numbered among Men, and became the first King of Numenor (calledTar-Minyatur), living to a very great age. The name means ‘Star-foam’.
Elu Sindarin form of Elwe.
Eluchil ‘Heir of Elu (Thingol)’, name of Dior, son of Beren and Luthien.See Dior.
Elured Elder son of Dior; perished in the attack on Doriath by the sons ofFeanor. The name means the same as Eluchil.
Elurm Younger son of Dior; perished with his brother Elured. The namemeans ‘Remembrance of Elu (Thingol)’.
Elvenhome See Eldamar.
Elves See Children of Iluvatar, Eldar, Dark Elves. Elves of the Light: seeCalaquendi.
Elwe Surnamed Singollo ‘Greymantle’; leader with his brother Olwe of thehosts of the Teleri on the westward journey from Cuivienen, until he waslost in Nan Elmoth; afterwards Lord of the Sindar, ruling in Doriath withMelian; received the Silmaril from Beren; slain in Menegroth by theDwarves. Called (Elu) Thingol in Sindarin. See Dark Elves, Thingol.
Elxving Daughter of Dior, who escaping from Doriath with the Silmarilwedded Earendil at the Mouths of Sirion and went with him to Valinor;mother of Elrond and Elros. The name means ‘Star-spray’; see LanthirLamath.
Emeldir Called the Man-hearted; wife of Barahir and mother of Beren; ledthe women and children of the House of Beor from Dorthonion after theDagor Bragollach. (She was herself also a descendant of Beor the Old, andher father’s name was Beren; this is not stated in the text.)
Emyn Beraid ‘The Tower Hills’ in the west of Eriador; see Elostirion.Enchanted Isles The islands set by the Valar in the Great Sea eastwards ofTol Eressea at the time of the Hiding of Valinor.
Encircling Mountains See Echoriath.
Encircling Sea See Ekkaia.
Endor ‘Middle Land’, Middle-earth.
Engwar ‘The Sickly’, one of the Elvish names for Men.
Eol Called the Dark Elf; the great smith who dwelt in Nan Elmoth, and tookAredhel Turgon’s sister to wife; friend of the Dwarves; maker of the swordAnglachel (Gurthang); father of Maeglin; put to death in Gondolin.
Eonwe One of the mightiest of the Maiar; called the Herald of Manwe;leader of the host of the Valar in the attack on Morgoth at the end of theFirst Age.
Ephel Brandir ‘The encircling fence of Brandir’, dwellings of the Men ofBrethil upon Amon Obel; also called the Ephel.
Ephel Duath ‘Fence of Shadow’, the mountain-range between Gondor andMordor; also called the Mountains of Shadow.
Erchamion ‘One-handed’, the name of Beren after his escape fromAngband.
Erech A hill in the west of Gondor, where was the Stone of Isildur (see TheReturn of the King V 2).
Ered Engrin ‘The Iron Mountains’ in the far north.
Ered Gorgoroth ‘The Mountains of Terror’, northward of Nan Dungortheb;also called the Gorgoroth.
Ered Lindon ‘The Mountains of Lindon’, another name for Ered Luin, theBlue Mountains.
Ered Lomin ‘The Echoing Mountains’, forming the west-fence of Hithlum.Ered Luin ‘The Blue Mountains’, also called Ered Lindon. After thedestruction at the end of the First Age Ered Luin formed the north-westerncoastal range of Middle-earth.
Ered Nimrais The White Mountains ( nimrais ‘white horns’), the great rangefrom east to west south of the Misty Mountains.
Ered Wethrin ‘The Mountains of Shadow’, ‘The Shadowy Mountains’, thegreat curving range bordering Dor-nu-Fauglith (Ard-galen) on the west andforming the barrier between Hithlum and West Beleriand.
Eregion ‘Land of Holly’ (called by Men Hollin ); Noldorin realm in theSecond Age at the western feet of the Misty Mountains, where the ElvenRings were made.
Ereinion ‘Scion of Kings’, the son of Fingon, known always by his surnameGil-galad.
Erellont One of the three mariners who accompanied Earendil on hisvoyages.
Eressea See Tol Eressea.
Eriador The land between the Misty Mountains and the Blue, in which laythe Kingdom of Arnor (and also the Shire of the Hobbits).
Eru ‘The One’, ‘He that is Alone’: Iluvatar. Also in Children ofEru.Esgalduin The river of Doriath, dividing the forests of Neldoreth andRegion, and flowing into Sirion. The name means ‘River under Veil’.
Este One of the Valier, the spouse of Irmo (Lorien); her name means ‘Rest’.Estolad The land south of Nan Elmoth where the Men of the followings ofBeor and Marach dwelt after they crossed the Blue Mountains intoBeleriand; translated in the text as ‘the Encampment’.
Ezellohar The Green Mound of the Two Trees of Valinor; also calledCorollaire.
Faelivrin Name given to Finduilas by Gwindor.
Faithful, The See Elendili.
Falas The western coasts of Beleriand, south of Nevrast.
Falathar One of the three mariners who accompanied Earendil on hisvoyages.
Falathrim The Telerin Elves of the Falas, whose lord was Cirdan.
Falmari The Sea-elves; name of the Teleri who departed from Middle-earthand went into the West.
Feanor Eldest son of Finwe (the only child of Finwe and Miriel), half-brother of Fingolfin and Finarfin; greatest of the Noldor, and leader in theirrebellion; deviser of the Feanorian script; maker of the Silmarils; slain inMithrim in the Dagornuin-Giliath. His name was Curufinwe (curu ‘skill’),and he gave this name to his fifth son, Curufin; but he was himself knownalways by his mother’s name for him, Feanaro ‘Spirit of Fire’, which wasgiven the Sindarin form Feanor. Chapters 5-9 and 13 passim. Elsewherehis name occurs chiefly in the sons of Feanor.
Feanturi ‘Masters of Spirits’, the Valar Namo (Mandos) and Irmo (Forien).Felagund The name by which King Finrod was known after theestablishment of Nargothrond; it was Dwarvish in origin ( felak-gundu‘cave-hewer’, but translated in the text as ‘Ford of Caves’). For referencessee Finrod.
Finarfin The third son of Finwe, the younger of Feanor’s half-brothers;remained in Aman after the Exile of the Noldor and ruled the remnant of hispeople in Tirion. Alone among the Noldorin princes he and his descendantshad golden hair, derived from his mother Indis, who was a Vanyarin Elf(see Vanyar). Many other occurrences of the name of Finarfin relate to hissons or his people.
Finduilas Daughter of Orodreth, loved by Gwindor; captured in the sack ofNargothrond, and killed by Ores at the Crossings of Teiglin.
Fingolfin The second son of Finwe, the elder of Feanor’s half-brothers;High King of the Noldor in Beleriand, dwelling in Hithlum; slain byMorgoth in single combat. Many other occurrences of the name ofFingolfin relate to his sons or his people.
Fingon The eldest son of Fingolfin, called the Valiant; rescued Maedhrosfrom Thangorodrim; High King of the Noldor after the death of his father;slain by Gothmog in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad.
Finrod The eldest son of Finarfin, called ‘the Faithful’ and ‘the Friend ofMen’. Founder and King of Nargothrond, whence his name Felagund;encountered in Ossiriand the first Men to cross the Blue Mountains; rescuedby Barahir in the Dagor Bragollach; redeemed his oath to Barahir byaccompanying Beren on his quest; slain in defence of Beren in thedungeons of Tol-in-Gaurhoth. The following references include those toFelagund used alone:
Finwe header of the Noldor on the westward journey from Cuivienen; Kingof the Noldor in Aman; father of Feanor, Fingolfin, and Finarfin; slain byMorgoth at Formenos. Other references are to his sons or his house.
Firimar ‘Mortals’, one of the Elvish names for Men.
Firstborn, The The Elder Children of Iluvatar, the Elves.
Followers, The The Younger Children of Iluvatar, Men; translation ofHildor.
Ford of Stones See Sam Athrad.
Fords ofAros See Arossiach.
Formenos ‘Northern Fortress’, the stronghold of Feanor and his sons in thenorth of Valinor, built after the banishment of Feanor from Tirion.
Fornost ‘Northern Fortress’, Numenorean city on the North Downs inEriador.
Forsaken Elves See Eglath.
Frodo The Ringbearer.
Fuinur A renegade Numenorean who became mighty among the Haradrimat the end of the Second Age.
Gabilgathol See Belegost.
Galadriel Daughter of Finarfin and sister of Finrod Felagund; one of theleaders of the Noldorin rebellion against the Valar; wedded Celeborn ofDoriath and with him remained in Middle-earth after the end of the FirstAge; keeper of Nenya, the Ring of Water, in Lothlorien.
Galathilion The White Tree of Tirion, the image of Telperion made byYavanna for the Vanyar and the Noldor.
Galdor Called the Tall; son of Hador Lorindol and lord of Dor-lomin afterhim; father of Hurin and Huor; slain at Eithel Sirion.galvorn The metal devised by Eol.
Gandalf The name among Men of Mithrandir, one of the Istari (Wizards);see Olorin.
Gates of Summer A great festival of Gondolin, on the eve of which the citywas assaulted by the forces of Morgoth.
Gelion The great river of East Beleriand, rising in Himring and Mount Rerirand fed by the rivers of Ossiriand flowing down from the Blue Mountains.Gelmir (1) Elf of Nargothrond, brother of Gwindor, captured in the DagorBragollach and afterwards put to death in front of Eithel Sirion, as aprovocation to its defenders, before the Nirnaeth Arnoediad.
Gelmir (2) Elf of the people of Angrod, who with Arminas came toNargothrond to warn Orodreth of its peril.
Gildor One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion.
Gil-Estel ‘Star of Hope’, Sindarin name for Earendil bearing the Silmaril inhis ship Vingilot.
Gil-galad ‘Star of Radiance’, the name by which Ereinion son of Fingon
was afterwards known. After the death of Turgon he became the last HighKing of the Noldor in Middle-earth, and remained in Lindon after the endof the First Age; leader with Elendil of the Last Alliance of Men and Elvesand slain with him in combat with Sauron.
Gimilkhad Younger son of Ar-Gimilzor and Inzilbeth and father of Ar-Pharazon, the last King of Numenor.
Gimilzor See Ar-Gimilzor.
Ginglith River in West Beleriand flowing into the Narog aboveNargothrond.
Gladden Fields Partial translation of Loeg Ningloron; the great stretches ofreeds and iris (gladden) in and about the Anduin, where Isildur was slainand the One Ring lost.
Glaurung The first of the Dragons of Morgoth, called the Father ofDragons; in the Dagor Bragollach, the Nirnaeth Arnoediad, and the Sack ofNargothrond; cast his spell upon Turin and upon Nienor; slain by Turin atCabed-en-Aras. Called also the Great Worm and the Worm of Morgoth.Glingal ‘Hanging Flame’, the image of Laurelin made by Turgon inGondolin.
Glirhuin A minstrel of Brethil.
Gloredhel Daughter of Hador Lorindol of Dor-lomin and sister of Galdor;wedded Haldir of Brethil.
Glorfindel Elf of Gondolin, who fell to his death in Cirith Thoronath incombat with a Balrog after the escape from the sack of the city. The namemeans ‘Golden-haired’.
Golodhrim The Noldor. Golodh was the Sindarin form of Quenya Noldo,and -rim a collective plural ending; cf. Annonin-Gelydh, the Gate of theNoldor.
Gondolin ‘The Hidden Rock’ (see Ondolinde ), secret city of King Turgonsurrounded by the Encircling Mountains (Echoriath).
Gondolindrim The people of Gondolin.
Gondor ‘Land of Stone’, name of the southern Numenorean kingdom inMiddle-earth, established by Isildur and Anarion. City of Gondor: MinasTirith.
Gonnhirrim ‘Masters of Stone’, a Sindarin name for the Dwarves.
Gorgoroth (1) See Ered Gorgoroth.
Gorgoroth (2) A plateau in Mordor, between the converging Mountains ofShadow and Mountains of Ash.
Gorlim Called the Unhappy; one of the twelve companions of Barahir onDorthonion, who was ensnared by a phantom of his wife Eilinel and
revealed to Sauron the hiding-place of Barahir.
Gorthaur The name of Sauron in Sindarin.
Gorthol ‘Dread Helm’, the name that Turin took as one of the Two Captainsin the land of Dor-Cuarthol.
Gothmog Lord of Balrogs, high-captain of Angband, slayer of Feanor,Fingon, and Ecthelion. (The same name was borne in the Third Age by theLieutenant of Minas Morgul; The Return of the King V 6.)
Greater Gelion One of the two tributary branches of the river Gelion in thenorth, rising in Mount Rerir.
Great Lands Middle-earth.
Great River See Anduin.
Green-elves Translation of Laiquendi; the Nandorin Elves of Ossiriand.Greenwood the Great The great forest east of the Misty Mountains,afterwards named Mirkwood.
Grey-elven tongue See Sindarin.
Grey-elves See Sindar.
Grey Havens See (The) Havens, Mithlond.
Greymantle See Singollo, Thingol.
Grinding Ice See Helcaraxe.
Grond The great mace of Morgoth, with which he fought Fingolfin; calledthe Hammer of the Underworld. The battering-ram used against the Gate ofMinas Tirith was named after it ( The Return of the King V 4).
Guarded Plain See Talath Dirnen.
Guarded Realm See Valinor.
Guilin Father of Gelmir and Gwindor, Elves of Nargothrond.
Gundor Younger son of Hador Lorindol, lord of Dor-lomin, slain with hisfather at Eithel Sirion in the Dagor Bragollach.
Gurthang ‘Iron of Death’, name of Beleg’s sword Anglachel after it wasreforged for Turin in Nargothrond, and from which he was namedMormegil.
Gwaith-i-Mfrdain ‘People of the Jewel-smiths’, name of the fellowship ofcraftsmen in Eregion, greatest of whom was Celebrimbor son of Curufin.Gwindor Elf of Nargothrond, brother of Gelmir; enslaved in Angband, butescaped and aided Beleg in the rescue of Turin; brought Turin toNargothrond; loved Finduilas Orodreth’s daughter; slain in the Battle ofTumhalad.
Hadhodrond The Sindarin name of Khazad-dum (Moria).
Hador Called Lorindol ‘Goldenhead’, also Hador the Golden-haired; lord
of Dor-lomin, vassal of Fingolfin; father of Galdor father of Hurin; slain atEithel Sirion in the Dagor Bragollach. The House of Hador was called theThird House of the Edain. House of, People of, Hador. Helm of Hador: seeDragon-helm of Dor-lomin.
Haladin The second people of Men to enter Beleriand; afterwards called thePeople ofHaleth, dwelling in the Forest of Brethil, also the Men ofBrethil.Haldad Leader of the Haladin in their defence against the attack on them byOres in Thargelion, and slain there; father of the Lady Haleth.
Haldan Son of Haidar; leader of the Haladin after the death of the LadyHaleth.
Haidar Son of Haldad of the Haladin, and brother of the Lady Haleth; slainwith his father in the Ore-raid on Thargelion.
Haldir Son of Halmir of Brethil; wedded Gloredhel, daughter of Hador ofDor-lomin; slain in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad.
Haleth Called the Lady Haleth; leader of the Haladin (who were namedfrom her the People of Haleth) from Thargelion to the lands west of Sirion.House of, People of, Haleth.
Half-elven Translation of Sindarin Peredhel, plural Peredhil, applied toElrond and Elros, and to Earendil.
Half lings Translation of Periannath (Hobbits).
Halls of Awaiting The Halls of Mandos.
Halmir Lord of the Haladin, son of Haldan; with Beleg of Doriath defeatedthe Ores that came south from the Pass of Sirion after the DagorBragollach.
Handir Son of Haldir and Gloredhel, father of Brandir the Lame; lord of theHaladin after Haldir’s death; slain in Brethil in battle with Ores.
Haradrim The Men of Harad (‘the South’), the lands south of Mordor.Hareth Daughter of Halmir of Brethil; wedded Galdor of Dorlomin; motherof Hurin and Huor.
Hathaldir Called the Young; one of the twelve companions of Barahir onDorthonion.
Hathol Father of Hador Lorindol.
Haudh-en-Arwen ‘The Ladybarrow’, the burial-mound of Haleth in theForest of Brethil.
Haudh-en-Elleth The mound in which Finduilas was buried, near theCrossings of Teiglin.
Haudh-en-Ndengin ‘The Mound of Slain’ in the desert of Anfauglith, wherewere piled the bodies of the Elves and Men that died in the NirnaethArnoediad.
Haudh-en-Nirnaeth ‘The Mound of Tears’, another name of Haudh-en-Ndengin.
Havens, The Brithombar and Eglarest on the coast of Beleriand: TheHavens of Sirion at the end of the First Age. The Grey Havens ( Mithlond )in the Gulf of Lhun. Alqualonde, the Haven of the Swans or Swanhaven, isalso called simply The Haven.
Helcar The Inland Sea in the northeast of Middle-earth, where once stoodthe mountain of the lamp of Illuin; the mere of Cuivienen where the firstElves awoke is described as a bay in this sea.
Helcaraxe The strait between Araman and Middle-earth; also referred to asthe Grinding Ice.
Helevorn ‘Black Glass’, a lake in the north of Thargelion, below MountRerir, where Caranthir dwelt.
Helluin The star Sirius.
Herumor A renegade Numenorean who became mighty among theHaradrim at the end of the Second Age.
Herunumen ‘Lord of the West’, Quenya name of Ar-Adunakhor.
Hidden Kingdom Name given both to Doriath, and to Gondolin.
High-elven See Quenya.
High Elves See Eldar.
High Faroth See Taur-en-Faroth.
Hildor ‘The Followers’, ‘The Aftercomers’, Elvish name for Men, as theYounger Children of Iluvatar.
Hildorien The land in the east of Middle-earth where the first Men ( Hildor )awoke.
Himlad ‘Cool Plain’, the region where Celegorm and Curufin dwelt southof the Pass of Aglon.
Himring The great hill west of Maglor’s Gap on which was the strongholdof Maedhros; translated in the text as ‘Ever-cold’.
Hirilorn The great beech-tree in Doriath with three trunks, in which Luthienwas imprisoned. The name means ‘Tree of the Lady’.
Hisilome ‘Land of Mist’, Quenya name of Hithlum.
Hithaeglir ‘Line of Misty Peaks’: the Misty Mountains, or Mountains ofMist. (The form Hithaeglin on the map to The Lord of the Rings is an error.)Hither Lands Middle-earth (also called the Outer Lands).
Hithlum ‘Land of Mist’, the region bounded on the east and south by EredWethrin and on the west by Ered Lomin; see Hisilome.
Hollin See Eregion.
Hollowbold Translation of Nogrod: ‘hollow dwelling’ (early English bold,
noun related to the verb build).
Huan The great wolfhound of Valinor that Orome gave to Celegorm; friendand helper of Beren and Luthien; slew and slain by Carcharoth. The namemeans 'great dog, hound 5 .
Hunthor A Man of the Haladin in Brethil who accompanied Turin in hisattack on Glaurung at Cabed-en-Aras and was killed there by a fallingstone.
Huor Son of Galdor of Dor-lomin, husband of Rian and father of Tuor;went to Gondolin with Hurin his brother; slain in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad.Hurin Called Thalion The Steadfast’, The Strong’; son of Galdor of Dor-Domin, husband of Morwen and father of Turin and Nienor; lord of Dor-lomin, vassal of Fingon. Went with Huor his brother to Gondolin; capturedby Morgoth in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad and set upon Thangorodrim formany years; after his release slew Mim in Nargothrond and brought theNauglamir to King Thingol.
Hyarmentir The highest mountain in the regions south of Valinor.
Iant Iaur ‘The Old Bridge’ over the Esgalduin on the northern borders ofDoriath; also called the Bridge of Esgalduin.
Ibun One of the sons of Mim the Petty-dwarf.
Idril Called Celebrindal ‘Silverfoot’; the daughter (and only child) ofTurgon and Elenwe; wife of Tuor, mother of Earendil, with whom sheescaped from Gondolin to the Mouths of Sirion; departed thence with Tuorinto the West.
Illuin One of the Lamps of the Valar made by Aule. Illuin stood in thenorthern part of Middle-earth, and after the overthrow of the mountain byMelkor the Inland Sea of Helcar was formed there.
Ilmare A Maia, the handmaid of Varda.
Ilmen The region above the air where the stars are.
Iluvatar ‘Father of All’, Eru.
Imlach Father of Amlach.
Imladris ‘Rivendell’ (literally, ‘Deep Dale of the Cleft’), Elrond’s dwellingin a valley of the Misty Mountains.
Indis Vanyarin Elf, close kin of Ingwe; second wife of Finwe, mother ofFingolfin and Finarfin.
Ingwe Leader of the Vanyar, the first of the three hosts of the Eldar on thewestward journey from Cuivienen. In Aman he dwelt upon Taniquetil, andwas held High King of all the Elves.
Inziladun Elder son of Ar-Gimilzor and Inzilbeth; afterwards named Tar-
Palantir.
Inzilbeth Queen of Ar-Gimilzor; of the house of the lords of Andunie.
Irmo The Vala usually named Lorien, the place of his dwelling.
Irmo means ‘Desirer’ or ‘Master of Desire’.
Iron Mountains See Ered Engrin.
Isengard Translation (to represent the language of Rohan) of the Elvishname Angrenost.
Isil Quenya name of the Moon.
Isildur Elder son of Elendil, who with his father and his brother Anarionescaped from the Drowning of Numenor and founded in Middle-earth theNumenorean realms in exile; lord of Minas Ithil; cut the Ruling Ring fromSauron’s hand; slain by Ores in the Anduin when the Ring slipped from hisfinger. Heirs of Isildur. Heir of Isildur = Aragorn.
Istari The Wizards. See Curunir, Saruman; Mithrandir, Gandalf, Olorin;Radagast.
Ivrin The lake and falls beneath Ered Wethrin where the river Narog rose.Pools of IvrinSee Eithel Ivrin.
kelvar An Elvish word retained in the speeches of Yavanna and Manwe inChapter 2: ‘animals, living things that move’.
Kementari ‘Queen of the Earth’, a title of Yavanna.
Khazad The name of the Dwarves in their own language (. Khuzdul ).Khazad-dum The great mansions of the Dwarves of Durin’s race in theMisty Mountains ( Hadhodrond , Moria ). See Khazad; dum is probably aplural or collective, meaning ‘excavations, halls, mansions’.
Khim Son of Mim the Petty-dwarf, slain by one of Turin’s outlaw band.King’s Men Numenoreans hostile to the Eldar and the Elendili.
Kinslaying, The The slaying of the Teleri by the Noldor at Alqualonde.
Ladros The lands to the northeast of Dorthonion that were granted by theNoldorin Kings to the Men of the House of Beor.
Laer Cu Beleg ‘The Song of the Great Bow’, made by Turin at Eithel Ivrinin memory of Beleg Cuthalion.
Laiquendi ‘The Green-elves’ of Ossiriand.
Lalaith ‘Laughter’, daughter of Hurin and Morwen who died in childhood.Lammoth ‘The Great Echo’, region north of the Firth of Drengist, namedfrom the echoes of Morgoth’s cry in his struggle with Ungoliant.
Land of Shadow See Mordor.
Land of the Dead that Live See Dor Firn-i-Guinar.
Land of the Star Numenor.
Lanthir Lamath 'Waterfall of Echoing Voices’, where Dior had his house inOssiriand, and after which his daughter Elwing (‘Star-spray’) was named.Last Alliance The league made at the end of the Second Age betweenElendil and Gil-galad to defeat Sauron.
Laurelin ‘Song of Gold’, the younger of the Two Trees of Valinor.
Lay of Leithian The long poem concerning the lives of Beren and Luthienfrom which the prose account in The Silmarillion was derived. Leithian istranslated ‘Release from Bondage’.
Legolin The third of the tributaries of Gelion in Ossiriand. lembas Sindarinname of the waybread of the Eldar (from earlier lenn-mbass ‘journey-bread’; in Quenya coimas ‘life-bread’).
Lenwe The leader of the Elves from the host of the Teleri who refused tocross the Misty Mountains on the westward journey from Cuivienen (theNandor); father of Denethor.
Lhun River in Eriador flowing into the sea in the Gulf of Lhun.
Linaexven ‘Lake of birds’, the great mere in Nevrast.
Lindon A name of Ossiriand in the First Age. After the tumults at the end ofthe First Age the name Lindon was retained for the lands west of the BlueMountains that still remained above the Sea.
Lindorie Mother of Inzilbeth.
Little Gelion One of the two tributary branches of the river Gelion in thenorth, rising in the Hill of Himring.
Loeg Ningloron ‘Pools of the golden water-flowers’; see Gladden Fields,lomelindi Quenya word meaning ‘dusk-singers’, nightingales.
Lomion ‘Son of Twilight’, the Quenya name that Aredhel gave to Maeglin.Lonely Isle See Tol Eressea.
Lord of Waters See Ulmo.
Lords of the West See Valar.
Lorellin The lake in Lorien in Valinor where the Vala Este sleeps by day.Lorgan Chief of the Easterling Men in Hithlum after the NirnaethArnoediad, by whom Tuor was enslaved.
Lorien (1) The name of the gardens and dwelling-place of the Vala Irmo,who was himself usually called Lorien.
Lorien (2) The land ruled by Celeborn and Galadriel between the riversCelebrant and Anduin. Probably the original name of this land was alteredto the form of the Quenya name Lorien of the gardens of the Vala Irmo inValinor. In Lothlorien the Sindarin word loth ‘flower’ is prefixed.
Lorindol ‘Goldenhead’; s eeHador.
Losgar The place of the burning of the ships of the Teleri by Feanor, at themouth of the Firth of Drengist.
Lothlann ‘The wide and empty’, the great plain north of the March ofMaedhros.
Lothlorien ‘Lorien of the Blossom’; see Lorien (2).
Luinil Name of a star (one shining with a blue light).
Lumbar Name of a star.
Luthien The daughter of King Thingol and Melian the Maia, who after thefulfilment of the Quest of the Silmaril and the death of Beren chose tobecome mortal and to share his fate. See Tinuviel.
Mablung Elf of Doriath, chief captain of Thingol, friend of Turin; called ‘ofthe Heavy Hand’ (which is the meaning of the name Mablung ); slain inMenegroth by the Dwarves.
Maedhros The eldest son of Feanor, called the Tall; rescued by Fingon fromThangorodrim; held the Hill of Himring and the lands about; formed theUnion of Maedhros that ended in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad; bore one of theSilmarils with him to his death at the end of the First Age.
Maeglin ‘Sharp Glance’, son of Eol and Aredhel Turgon’s sister, born inNan Elmoth; became mighty in Gondolin, and betrayed it to Morgoth; slainin the sack of the city by Tuor. See Lomion.
Maglor The second son of Feanor, a great singer and minstrel; held thelands called Maglor’s Gap; at the end of the First Age seized withMaedhros the two Silmarils that remained in Middle-earth, and cast the onethat he took into the Sea.
Maglor ’s Gap The region between the northern arms of Gelion where therewere no hills of defence against the North.
Magor Son of Malach Aradan; leader of the Men of the following ofMarach who entered West Beleriand.
Mahal The name given to Aule by the Dwarves.
Mahanaxar The Ring of Doom outside the gates of Valmar, in which wereset the thrones of the Valar where they sat in council.
Mahtan A great smith of the Noldor, father of Nerdanel the wife of Feanor.Malar Ainur of lesser degree than the Valar (singular Maia).
Malach Son of Marach; given the Elvish name Aradan.
Malduin A tributary of the Teiglin; the name probably means ‘YellowRiver’.
Malinalda ‘Tree of Gold’, a name of Laurelin.
Mandos The place of the dwelling in Aman of the Vala properly called
Namo, the Judge, though this name was seldom used, and he himself wasusually referred to as Mandos. Named as Vala. Named as the place of hisdwelling (including Halls of Mandos; also Halls of Awaiting, Houses of theDead). With reference to the Doom of the Noldor and the Curse of Mandos.Manwe The chief of the Valar, called also Sulimo, the Elder King, the RulerofArda.
Marach Leader of the third host of Men to enter Beleriand, ancestor ofHador Lorindol.
March of Maedhros The open lands to the north of the head-waters of theriver Gelion, held by Maedhros and his brothers against attack on EastBeleriand; also called the eastern March.
Mardil Called the Faithful; the first Ruling Steward of Gondor.Mar-nu-Falmar The Land under the Waves’, name of Numenor after theDownfall.
Melian A Maia, who left Valinor and came to Middle-earth; afterwards theQueen of King Thingol in Doriath, about which she set a girdle ofenchantment, the Girdle of Melian; mother of Luthien, and foremother ofElrond and Elros.
Melkor The Quenya name for the great rebellious Vala, the beginning ofevil, in his origin the mightiest of the Ainur; afterwards named Morgoth,Bauglir, the Dark Lord, the Enemy, etc. The meaning of Melkor was 'Hewho arises in Might’; the Sindarin form was Belegur, but it was never used,save in a deliberately altered form Belegurth 'Great Death’. Passim (afterthe rape of the Silmarils usually called Morgoth).
MenAtani, Children oflluvatar, Easterlings.
Menegroth ‘The Thousand Caves’, the hidden halls of Thingol and Melianon the river Esgalduin in Doriath.
Meneldil Son of Anarion, King of Gondor.
Menelmacar ‘Swordsman of the Sky’, the constellation Orion.
Meneltarma 'Pillar of Heaven’, the mountain in the midst of Numenor,upon whose summit was the Hallow of Eru Iluvatar.
Meres of Twilight See Aelin-uial.
Mereth Aderthad The 'Feast of Reuniting’ held by Fingolfin near the Poolsof Ivrin.
Mickleburg Translation of Belegost: ‘great fortress’.
Middle-earth The lands to the east of the Great Sea; also called the HitherLands, the Outer Lands, the Great Lands, and Endor. Passim.
Mim The Petty-dwarf, in whose house ( Bar-en-Danwedh ) on Amon RudhTurin dwelt with the outlaw band, and by whom their lair was betrayed to
the Ores; slain by Hurin in Nargothrond.
Minas Anor ‘Tower of the Sun’ (also simply Anor), afterwards called MinasTirith; the city of Anarion, at the feet of Mount Mindolluin.
Minas Ithil ‘Tower of the Moon’, afterwards called Minas Morgul; the cityof Isildur, built on a shoulder of the Ephel Duath.
Minas Morgul ‘Tower of Sorcery’ (also simply Morgul), name of MinasIthil after its capture by the Ringwraiths.
Minastir See Tar-Minastir.
Minas Tirith (1) ‘Tower of Watch’, built by Finrod Felagund on Tol Sirion;see Tol-in-Gaurhoth.
Minas Tirith (2) Fater name of Minas Anor. Called the City ofGondor.Mindeb A tributary of Sirion, between Dimbar and the Forest of Neldoreth.Mindolluin ‘Towering Blue-head’, the great mountain behind Minas Anor.Mindon Eldalieva ‘Fofty Tower of the Eldalie’, the tower of Ingwe in thecity of Tirion; also simply the Mindon.
Muriel (1) The first wife of Finwe, mother of Feanor; died after Feanor’sbirth. Called Serinde ‘the Broideress’.
Muriel (2) Daughter of Tar-Palantir, forced into marriage by Ar-Pharazon,and as his queen named Ar-Zimraphel; also called Tar-Miriel.
Mirkwood See Greenwood the Great.
Misty Mountains See Hithaeglir.
Mithlond ‘The Grey Havens’, harbours of the Elves on the Gulf of Fhun;also referred to as the Havens.
Mithrandir ‘The Grey Pilgrim’, Elvish name of Gandalf (Olorin), one of theIstari (Wizards).
Mithrim The name of the great lake in the east of Hithlum, and also of theregion about it and of the mountains to the west, separating Mithrim fromDor-lomin. The name was originally that of the Sindarin Elves who dweltthere.
Mordor ‘The Black Fand’, also called the Land of Shadow; Sauron’s realmeast of the mountains of the Ephel Duath.
Morgoth ‘The Black Enemy’, name of Melkor, first given to him by Feanorafter the rape of the Silmarils and thereafter passim. See Melkor.
Morgul See Minas Morgul.
Moria ‘The Black Chasm’, later name for Khazad-dum (Hadhodrond).Moriquendi ‘Elves of the Darkness’; see Dark Elves.
Mormegil ‘The Black Sword’, name given to Turin as captain of the host ofNargothrond; see Gurthang.
Morwen Daughter of Baragund (nephew of Barahir, the father of Beren);
wife of Hurin and mother of Turin and Nienor; called Eledhwen (translatedin the text as ‘Elfsheen’) and the Lady of Dor-lomin.
Mountain of Fire See Orodruin.
Mountains : of Aman, of Defence, see Pelori; of the East, see Orocarni; ofIron, see Ered Engrin; of Mist, see Hithaeglir; of Mithrim, see Mithrim; ofShadow, see Ered Wethrin and Ephel Duath; of Terror, see Ered Gorgoroth.Mount Doom See Amon Amarth.
Music of the Amur See Ainulindale.
Nahar The horse of the Vala Orome, said by the Eldar to be so named onaccount of his voice.
Namo A Vala, one of the Aratar; usually named Mandos, the place of hisdwelling. Namo means ‘Ordainer, Judge 5 .
Nandor Said to mean ‘Those who turn back’: the Nandor were those Elvesfrom the host of the Teleri who refused to cross the Misty Mountains on thewestward journey from Cuivienen, but of whom a part, led by Denethor,came long afterwards over the Blue Mountains and dwelt in Ossiriand (theGreen-elves).
Nan Dungortheb Also Dungortheb; translated in the text as ‘Valley ofDreadful Death’. The valley between the precipices of Ered Gorgoroth andthe Girdle of Melian.
Nan Elmoth The forest east of the river Celon where Elwe (Thingol) wasenchanted by Melian and lost; afterwards the dwelling-place of Eol.Nan-tathren ‘Willow-vale’, translated as ‘the Land of Willows’, where theriver Narog flowed into Sirion. In Treebeard’s song in The Two Towers III 4Quenya forms of the name are used: in the willow-meads of Tasarinan;Nan-tasarion.
Nargothrond ‘The great underground fortress on the river Narog’, foundedby Finrod Felagund and destroyed by Glaurung; also the realm ofNargothrond extending east and west of the Narog.
Nam i Hin Hurin ‘The Tale of the Children of Hurin’, the long lay fromwhich Chapter 21 was derived; ascribed to the poet Dirhaval, a Man wholived at the Havens of Sirion in the days of Earendil and perished in theattack of the sons of Feanor.
Nam signifies a tale made in verse, but to be spoken and not sung.
Narog The chief river of West Beleriand, rising at Ivrin under Ered Wethrinand flowing into Sirion in Nan-tathren.
Narsil The sword of Elendil, made by Telchar of Nogrod, that was brokenwhen Elendil died in combat with Sauron; from the shards it was reforged
for Aragorn and named Anduril.
Narsilion The Song of the Sun and Moon.
Narya One of the Three Rings of the Elves, the Ring of Fire or the RedRing; borne by Cirdan and afterwards by Mithrandir.
Nauglamir ‘The Necklace of the Dwarves’, made for Finrod Felagund bythe Dwarves, brought by Hurin out of Nargothrond to Thingol, and thecause of his death.
Naugrim ‘The Stunted People’, Sindarin name for the Dwarves.
Nazgul See Ring-wraiths.
Necklace of the Dwarves See Nauglamir.
Neithan Name given to himself by Turin among the outlaws, translated as‘The Wronged’ (literally ‘one who is deprived’).
Neldoreth The great beech-forest forming the northern part of Doriath;called Taur-na-Neldor in Treebeard’s song in The Two Towers III 4.
Nenar Name of a star.
Nen Girith ‘Shuddering Water’, name given to Dimrost, the falls ofCelebros in the Forest of Brethil.
Nenning River in West Beleriand, reaching the sea at the Haven of Eglarest.Nenuial ‘Fake of Twilight’, in Eriador, where the river Baranduin rose, andbeside which the city of Annuminas was built.
Nenya One of the Three Rings of the Elves, the Ring of Water, borne byGaladriel; also called the Ring of Adamant.
Nerdanel Called the Wise; daughter of Mahtan the smith, wife of Feanor.Nessa One of the Valier, the sister of Orome and spouse of Tulkas.
Nevrast The region west of Dor-lomin, beyond Ered Fomin, where Turgondwelt before his departure to Gondolin. The name, meaning ‘Hither Shore’,was originally that of all the northwestern coast of Middle-earth (theopposite being Haerast ‘the Far Shore’, the coast of Aman).
Nienna One of the Valier, numbered among the Aratar; Fady of pity andmourning, the sister of Mandos and Forien.
Nienor ‘Mourning’, the daughter of Hurin and Morwen and sister of Turin;spell-bound by Glaurung at Nargothrond and in ignorance of her pastwedded Turin in Brethil in her name Niniel; cast herself into the Teiglin.Nimbrethil Birch-woods in Arvernien in the south of Beleriand. Cf. Bilbo’ssong at Rivendell: ‘He built a boat of timber felled in Nimbrethil to journeyin ...’(The Fellowship of the Ring II 1).
Nimloth (1) The White Tree of Numenor, of which a fruit taken by Isildurbefore it was felled grew into the White Tree of Minas Ithil. Nimloth ‘WhiteBlossom’ is the Sindarin form of Quenya Ninquelote, one of the names of
Telperion.
Nimloth (2) Elf of Doriath who wedded Dior Thingol’s Heir; mother ofElwing; slain in Menegroth in the attack by the sons of Feanor.
Nimphelos The great pearl given by Thingol to the lord of the Dwarves ofBelegost.
Niniel ‘Tear-maiden’, the name that Turin, ignorant of their relationship,gave to his sister; see Nienor.
Ninquelote ‘White Blossom’, a name of Telperion; see Nimloth (1).niphredil A white flower that bloomed in Doriath in starlight when Futhienwas born. It grew also on Cerin Amroth in Lothlorien ( The Fellowship ofthe Ring II 6).
Nirnaeth Arnoediad ‘Tears Unnumbered’ (also simply the Nirnaeth), thename given to the ruinous fifth battle in the Wars of Beleriad.
Nivrim That part of Doriath that lay on the west bank of Sirion.
Noegyth Nibin ‘Petty-dwarves (see also under Dwarves).
Nogrod One of the two cities of the Dwarves in the Blue Mountains;translation into Sindarin of Dwarvish Tumunzahar. See Hollowbold.Noldolante ‘The Fall of the Noldor’, a lament made by Maglor son ofFeanor.
Noldor The Deep Elves, the second host of the Eldar on the westwardjourney from Cuivienen, led by Finwe. The name (Quenya Noldo, SindarinGolodh ) meant ‘the Wise’ (but wise in the sense of possessing knowledge,not in the sense of possessing sagacity, sound judgement). For the languageof the Noldor see Quenya.
Nom, Nomin ‘Wisdom’ and ‘the Wise’, the names that the Men of Beor’sfollowing gave to Finrod and his people in their own tongue.
North Downs In Eriador, where was built the Numenorean city of Fornost.Nulukkizdm Dwarvish name of Nargothrond.
Numenor (In full Quenya form Numenor e.) ‘Westernesse’, ‘Westland’, thegreat island prepared by the Valar as a dwelling-place for the Edain after theending of the First Age. Called also Anadune, Andor, Elenna, the Land ofthe Star, and after its downfall Akallabeth, Atalante, and Mar-nu-Falmar.Numenoreans The Men of Numenor, called also Dunedain.
Nurtale Valinoreva ‘The Hiding of Valinor’.
Ohtar ‘Warrior’, esquire of Isildur, who brought the shards of Elendil’ssword to Imladris.
Oiolosse ‘Ever-snow-white’, the most common name among the Eldar forTaniquetil, rendered into Sindarin as Amon Uilos; but according to the
Valaquenta it was ‘the uttermost tower of Taniquetil 5 .
Oiomure A region of mists near to the Helcaraxe.
Olorin A Maia, one of the Istari (Wizards); Mithrandir, Gandalf, and cf. TheTwo Tower IV 5: ‘Olorin I was in my youth in the West that is forgotten 5 .olvar An Elvish word retained in the speeches of Yavanna and Manwe inChapter 2, meaning ‘growing things with roots in the earth 5 .
Olwe Leader together with his brother Elwe (Thingol) of the hosts of theTeleri on the westward journey from Cuivienen; lord of the Teleri ofAlqualonde in Aman.
Ondolinde ‘Stone Song 5 , the original Quenya name of Gondolin.
Ores Creatures of Morgoth.
Orfalch Echor The great ravine through the Encircling Mountains by whichGondolin was approached.
Ormal One of the Lamps of the Valar made by Aule. Ormal stood in thesouth of Middle-earth.
Orocarni The Mountains of the East of Middle-earth (the name means ‘theRed Mountains 5 ).
Orodreth The second son of Finarfin; warden of the tower of Minas Tirithon Tol Sirion; King of Nargothrond after the death of Finrod his brother;father of Finduilas; slain in the Battle of Tumhalad.
Orodruin ‘Mountain of Blazing Fire 5 in Mordor, in which Sauron forged theRuling Ring; called also Amon Amarth ‘Mount Doom 5 .
Orome A Vala, one of the Aratar; the great hunter, leader of the Elves fromCuivienen, spouse of Vana. The name means ‘Horn-blowing 5 or ‘Sound ofHorns 5 , cf. Valaroma; in The Lord of the Rings it appears in the Sindarinform Araw.
Oromet A hill near the haven of Andunie in the west of Numenor, on whichwas built the tower of Tar-Minastir.
Orthanc ‘Forked Height 5 , the Numenorean tower in the Circle of Isengard.Osgiliath ‘Fortress of the Stars 5 , the chief city of ancient Gondor, on eitherside of the river Anduin.
Osse A Maia, vassal of Ulmo, with whom he entered the waters of Arda;lover and instructor of the Teleri.
Ossiriand ‘Land of Seven Rivers 5 (these being Gelion and its tributariesflowing down from the Blue Mountains), the land of the Green-elves. Cf.Treebeard’s song in The Two Towers III 4: ‘I wandered in Summer in theelm-woods of Ossiriand. Ah! the light and the music in the Summer by theSeven Rivers of Ossir! 5 See Lindon.
Ost-in-Edhil ‘Fortress of the Eldar 5 , the city of the Elves in Eregion.
Outer Lands Middle-earth (also called the Hither Lands).
Outer Sea See Ekkaia.
Palantiri Those that watch from afar’, the seven Seeing Stones brought byElendil and his sons from Numenor; made by Feanor in Aman (see The TwoTowers III 11).
Pelargir ‘Garth of Royal Ships’, the Numenorean haven above the delta ofAnduin.
Pelori ‘The fencing or defensive heights’, called also the Mountains ofAman and the Mountains of Defence, raised by the Valar after thedestruction of their dwelling on Almaren; ranging in a crescent from northto south, close to the eastern shores of Aman.
People ofHaleth See Haladin and Haleth.
Periannath The Halflings (Hobbits).
Petty-dwarves Translation of Noegyth Nibin. See also under Dwarves.Pharazon See Ar-Pharazdn.
Prophecy of the North The Doom of the Noldor, uttered by Mandos on thecoast of Araman.
Quendi Original Elvish name for Elves (of every kind, including the Avari),meaning ‘Those that speak with voices’.
Quenta Silmarillion ‘The History of the Silmarils.’
Quenya The ancient tongue, common to all Elves, in the form that it took inValinor; brought to Middle-earth by the Noldorin exiles, but abandoned bythem as a daily speech, especially after the edict of King Thingol against itsuse; see especially 128-9, 149-50. Not named as such in this book, butreferred to as Eldarin; High Eldarin; High-elven; the tongue of Valinor; thespeech of the Elves of Valinor; the tongue of the Noldor; the High Speech ofthe West.
Radagast One of the Istari (Wizards).
Radhruin One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion.
Ragnor One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion.
Ramdal ‘Wall’s End’ (see Andram), where the dividing fall across Beleriandceased.
Rana ‘The Wanderer’, a name of the Moon among the Noldor.
Rathloriel ‘Golden-bed’, later name for the river Ascar, after the treasure ofDoriath was sunk in it.
Rauros ‘Roaring Spray’, the great falls in the river Anduin.
Red Ring, The See Narya.
Region The dense forest forming the southern part of Doriath.
Rerir Mountain to the north of Lake Helevorn, where rose the greater of thetwo tributary branches of Gelion.
Rhovanion ‘Wilderland’, the wide region east of the Misty Mountains.Rhudaur Region in the north-east of Eriador.
Rian Daughter of Belegund (nephew of Barahir, the father of Beren); wifeof Huor and mother of Tuor; after Huor’s death died of grief on the Haudh-en-Ndengin.
Ringil The sword of Fingolfin.
Ring of Doom See Mahanaxar.
Rings of Power The One Ring, Great Ring, or Ruling Ring: Three Rings ofthe Elves : (see also Narya, the Ring of Fire, Nenya, the Ring of Adamant,and Vdya, the Ring of Sapphire). Seven Rings of the Dwarves. Nine Rings ofMen.
Ringwil The stream that flowed into the river Narog at Nargothrond.Ring-wraiths The slaves of the Nine Rings of Men and chief servants ofSauron; also called Nazgul and Ulairi.
Rivendell Translation of Imladris.
Rivil Stream falling northwards from Dorthonion and flowing into Sirion inthe Fen of Serech. Rivil’s Well.
Rochallor The horse of Fingolfin.
Rohan The Horse-country’, later name in Gondor for the great grassy plainformerly called Calenardhon.
Rohirrim The Horse-lords’ of Rohan.
Romenna Haven on the east coast of Numenor.
Rothinzil Adunaic (Numenorean) name of Earendil’s ship Vingilot, with thesame meaning, 'Foam-flower’.
Rumil A Noldorin sage of Tirion, the first deviser of written characters (cf.The Lord of the Rings Appendix E II); to him is attributed the Ainulindale.
Saeros Nandorin Elf, one of the chief counsellors of Thingol in Doriath;insulted Turin in Menegroth, and by him pursued to his death.
Salmar A Maia who entered Arda with Ulmo; maker of Ulmo’s great horns,the Ulumuri.
Sam Athrad 'Ford of Stones’, where the Dwarf-road from Nogrod andBelegost crossed the river Gelion.
Saruman ‘Man of Skill’, the name among Men of Curunir (which ittranslates), one of the Istari (Wizards).
Sauron The Abhorred’ (in Sindarin called Gorthaur ); greatest of theservants of Melkor, in his origin a Maia of Aule.
Secondborn, The The Younger Children of Iluvatar, Men.
Seeing Stones See Palantiri.
Serech The great fen north of the Pass of Sirion, where the river Rivilflowed in from Dorthonion.
seregon 'Blood of Stone’, a plant with deep red flowers that grew on AmonRudh.
Serinde The Broideress’; see Miriel (1).
Seven Fathers of the Dwarves See Dwarves.
Seven Stones See Palantiri.
Shadowy Mountains See Ered Wethrin.
Shepherds of the Trees Ents.
Sickle of the Valar See Valacirca.
Silmarien Daughter of Tar-Elendil, the fourth King of Numenor; mother ofthe first lord of Andunie and ancestress of Elendil and his sons Isildur andAnarion.
Silmarils The three jewels made by Feanor before the destruction of theTwo Trees of Valinor, and filled with their light.
Silpion A name of Telperion.
Silvan Elves Also called Woodland Elves. They appear to have been inorigin those Nandorin Elves who never passed west of the MistyMountains, but remained in the Vale of Anduin and in Greenwood theGreat; see Nandor.
Sindar The Grey-elves. The name was applied to all the Elves of Telerinorigin whom the returning Noldor found in Beleriand, save for the Green-elves of Ossiriand. The Noldor may have devised this name because thefirst Elves of this origin whom they met with were in the north, under thegrey skies and mists about Lake Mithrim (see Mithrim ); or perhaps becausethe Grey-elves were not of the Light (of Valinor) nor yet of the Dark(Avari), but were Elves of the Twilight. But it was held to refer to Elwe’sname Thingol (Quenya Sindacollo, Singollo 'Grey-cloak’), since he wasacknowledged high king of all the land and its peoples. The Sindar calledthemselves Edhil, plural Edhel.
Sindarin The Elvish tongue of Beleriand, derived from the common Elvishspeech but greatly changed through long ages from Quenya of Valinor;acquired by the Noldorin exiles in Beleriand. Called also the Grey-elventongue, the tongue of the Elves of Beleriand, etc.
Singollo ‘Grey-cloak’, 'Grey-mantle’; see Sindar, Thingol.
Sirion The Great River’ flowing from north to south and dividing Westfrom East Beleriand. Falls of Sirion. Fens of Siron. Gates of Sirion. Havensof Sirion. Mouths of Sirion. Vale of Sirion.
Sons of Feanor See Maedhros, Maglor, Celegorm, Caranthir, Curufin,Amrod, Amras. Often referred to as a group, especially after the death oftheir father.
Soronume Name of a constellation.
Stone of the Hapless Memorial stone of Turin and Nienor by CabedNaeramarth in the river Teiglin.
Straight Road, Straight Way The path over the Sea into the Ancient or TrueWest, on which the ships of the Elves might still sail after the Downfall ofNumenor and the Changing of the World.
Strongbow Translation of Cuthalion, name of Beleg.
Sulimo Name of Manwe, rendered in the Valaquenta as 'Lord of the Breathof Arda’ (literally ‘the Breather’).
Swanhaven See Alqualonde.
Swarthy Men See Easterlings.
Talath Dirnen The Guarded Plain, north of Nargothrond.
Talath Rhunen ‘The East Vale’, earlier name of Thargelion.
Taniquetil ‘High White Peak’, highest of the mountains of the Pelori andthe highest mountain of Arda, upon whose summit are Ilmarin, themansions of Manwe and Varda; also called the White Mountain, the HolyMountain, and the Mountain of Manwe. See Oiolosse.
Tar-Ancalimon Fourteenth King of Numenor, in whose time theNumenoreans became divided into opposed parties.
Taras Mountain on a promontory of Nevrast; beneath it was Vinyamar, thedwelling of Turgon before he went to Gondolin.
Tar-Atanamir Thirteenth King of Numenor, to whom the Messengers of theValar came.
Tar-Calion Quenya name of Ar-Pharazon.
Tar-Ciryatan Twelfth King of Numenor, ‘the Shipbuilder’.
Tar-Elendil Fourth King of Numenor, father of Silmarien, from whomElendil was descended.
Tar-Minastir Eleventh King of Numenor, who aided Gil-galad againstSauron.
Tar-Minyatur Name of Elros Half-elven as first King of Numenor.
Tar-Miriel See Miriel (2).
Tarn Aeluin The lake on Dorthonion where Barahir and his companions
made their lair, and where they were slain.
Tar-Palantir Twenty-fourth King of Numenor, who repented of the ways ofthe Kings, and took his name in Quenya: ‘He who looks afar’. SeeInziladun.
Taur-en-Faroth The wooded highlands to the west of the river Narog aboveNargothrond; also called the High Faroth.
Taur-im-Duinath ‘The Forest between Rivers’, name of the wild countrysouth of the Andram between Sirion and Gelion.
Taur-nu-Fuin Later name of Dorthonion: ‘the Forest under Night’. Cf.Delduwath.
Tauron ‘The Forester’ (translated in the Valaquenta ‘Lord of Forests’), aname of Orome among the Sindar. Cf. Aldaron.
Teiglin A tributary of Sirion, rising in Ered Wethrin and bounding the Forestof Brethil on the south; see also Crossings of Teiglin.
Telchar The most renowned of the smiths of Nogrod, the maker of Angristand (according to Aragorn in The Two Towers III 6) of Narsil.
Telemnar Twenty-sixth King of Gondor.
Teleri The third and greatest of the three hosts of the Eldar on the westwardjourney from Cuivienen, led by Elwe (Thingol) and Olwe. Their own namefor themselves was Lindar, the Singers; the name Teleri, the Last-comers,the Hindmost, was given to them by those before them on the march. Manyof the Teleri did not leave Middle-earth; the Sindar and the Nandor wereTelerin Elves in origin.
Telperion The elder of the Two Trees of Valinor. Called the White Tree.Telumendil Name of a constellation.
Thalion ‘Steadfast, Strong’; see Hurin.
Thalos The second of the tributaries of Gelion in Ossiriand.
Thangorodrim ‘Mountains of Tyranny’, reared by Morgoth above Angband;broken down in the Great Battle at the end of the First Age.
Thargelion ‘The Land beyond Gelion’, between Mount Rerir and the riverAscar, where Caranthir dwelt; called also Dor Caranthir and TalathRhunen.
Thingol ‘Grey-cloak’, ‘Grey-mantle’ (in Quenya Sindacollo, Singollo), thename by which Elwe, leader with his brother Olwe of the host of the Telerifrom Cuivienen and afterwards King of Doriath, was known in Beleriand;also called the Hidden King. See Elwe.
Thorondor ‘King of Eagles.’ Cf. The Return of the King VI 4: ‘OldThorondor, who built his eyries in the inaccessible peaks of the EncirclingMountains when Middle-earth was young’. See Crissaegrim.
Thousand Caves See Menegroth.
Thranduil Sindarin Elf, King of the Silvan Elves in the north of Greenwoodthe Great (Mirkwood); father of Legolas, who was of the Fellowship of theRing.
Thuringwethil 'Woman of Secret Shadow’, the messenger of Sauron fromTol-in-Gaurhoth who took the form of a great bat, and in whose shapeLuthien entered Angband.
Tilion A Maia, steersman of the Moon.
Tintalle 'The Kindler’, a name of Varda as maker of the Stars. She is calledthus in Galadriel’s lament in Lorien, The Fellowship of the Ring II 8. Cf.Elbereth, Elentari.
Tinuviel The name that Beren gave to Luthien: a poetic word for thenightingale, 'Daughter of Twilight’. See Luthien.
Tirion ‘Great Watch-tower’, the city of the Elves on the hill of Tuna inAman.
Tol Eressea ‘The Lonely Isle’ (also simply Eressea ), on which the Vanyarand the Noldor and afterwards the Teleri were drawn across the ocean byUlmo, and which was at last rooted in the Bay of Eldamar near to the coastsof Aman. On Eressea the Teleri long remained before they went toAlqualonde; and there dwelt many of the Noldor and the Sindar after theending of the First Age.
Tol Galen ‘The Green Isle’ in the river Adurant in Ossiriand, where Berenand Luthien dwelt after their return.
Tol-in-Gaurhoth ‘Isle of Werewolves’, name of Tol Sirion after its captureby Sauron.
Tol Morwen Island in the sea after the drowning of Beleriand on whichstood the memorial stone of Turin, Nienor, and Morwen.
Tol Sirion Island in the river in the Pass of Sirion on which Finrod built thetower of Minas Tirith; after its capture by Sauron named Tol-in-Gaurhoth.Tulkas A Vala, the ‘greatest in strength and deeds of prowess’, who camelast to Arda; also called Astaldo.
Tumhalad Valley in the land between the rivers Ginglith and Narog, wherethe host of Nargothrond was defeated.
Tumladen ‘The Wide Valley’, the hidden vale in the Encircling Mountainsin the midst of which stood the city of Gondolin. ( Tumladen was afterwardsthe name of a valley in Gondor: The Return of the King V 1.)
Tumunzahar See Nogrod.
Tuna The green hill in the Calacirya on which Tirion, the city of the Elves,was built.
Tuor Son of Huor and Rian, fostered by the Grey-elves of Mithrim; enteredGondolin bearing the message of Ulmo; wedded Idril Turgon’s daughter,and with her and their son Earendil escaped from the destruction of the city;in his ship Earrame set sail into the West.
Turambar ‘Master of Doom’, the last name taken by Turin, during his daysin the Forest of Brethil.
Turgon Called the Wise; the second son of Fingolfin; dwelt at Vinyamar inNevrast before he departed in secret to Gondolin, which he ruled until hisdeath in the sack of the city; father of Idril the mother of Earendil: called(like Thingol) the Hidden King.
Tur Haretha The burial-mound of the Lady Haleth in the Forest of Brethil(see Haudh-en-Arwen).
Turin Son of Hurin and Morwen; chief subject of the lay named Nam i HmHurin from which Chapter 21 was derived. For his other names seeNeithan, Gorthol, Agarwaen, Mormegil, Wildman of the Woods, Turambar.Twilight Meres See Aelin-uial.
Two Kindreds Elves and Men.
Two Trees of Valinor.
Uinen A Maia, the Lady of the Seas, spouse of Osse.
Ulairi See Ring-wraiths.
Uldor Called the Accursed; son of Ulfang the Black; slain by Maglor in theNirnaeth Arnoediad.
Ulfang Called the Black; a chieftain of the Easterlings, who with his threesons followed Caranthir, and proved faithless in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad.Ulfast Son of Ulfang the Black, slain by the sons of Bor in the NirnaethArnoediad.
Ulmo A Vala, one of the Aratar, called Lord of Waters and King of the Sea.The name was interpreted by the Eldar to mean ‘The Pourer’ or ‘TheRainer’.
Ulumuri The great horns of Ulmo made by the Maia Sal
Ulwarth Son of Ulfang the Black, slain by the sons of Bor in the Nirnaeth
Arnoediad.
Umanyar Name given to those Elves who went on the westward journeyfrom Cuivienen but did not reach Aman: ‘Those not of Aman’, besideAmanyar ‘Those of Aman’.
Umarth ‘Ill-fate’, a fictitious name for his father given out by Turin inNargothrond.
Umbar Great natural haven and fortress of the Numenoreans south of the
Bay of Belfalas.
Undying Lands Aman and Eressea; also called the Deathless Lands.Ungoliant The great spider, destroyer with Melkor of the Trees of Valinor.Shelob in The Lord of the Rings was ‘the last child of Ungoliant to troublethe unhappy world’ ( The Two Towers IV 9).
Union of Maedhros The league formed by Maedhros to defeat Morgoth thatended in the Nirnaeth Arnoediad.
Urthel One of the twelve companions of Barahir on Dorthonion.
Uruloki Quenya word meaning ‘fire-serpent’, dragon.
Utumno The first great stronghold of Melkor, in the north of Middle-earth,destroyed by the Valar.
Vaire ‘The Weaver’, one of the Valier, the spouse of Namo Mandos.Valacirca ‘The Sickle of the Valar’, name of the constellation of the GreatBear.
Valandil Youngest son of Isildur; third King of Arnor.
Valaquenta ‘Account of the Valar’, a short work treated as a separate entityfrom The Silmarillion proper.
Valar ‘Those with Power’, ‘The Powers’ (singular Vala ); name given tothose great Ainur who entered into Ea at the beginning of Time, andassumed the function of guarding and governing Arda. Called also theGreat Ones, the Rulers of Arda, the Lords of the West, the Lords of Valinor.Passim; see also Ainur, Aratar.
Valaraukar ‘Demons of Might’ (singular Valarauko), Quenya formcorresponding to Sindarin Balrog.
Valaroma The horn of the Vala Orome.
Valier ‘The Queens of the Valar’ (singular Valie ); a term used only in theValaquenta.
Valimar See Valmar.
Valinor The land of the Valar in Aman, beyond the mountains of the Pelori;also called the Guarded Realm.
Valmar The city of the Valar in Valinor; the name also occurs in the formValimar. In Galadriel’s lament in Lorien ( The Fellowship of the Ring II 8)Valimar is made equivalent to Valinor.
Vana One of the Valier, the sister of Yavanna and spouse of Orome; calledthe Ever-young.
Vanyar The first host of the Eldar on the westward journey from Cuivienen,led by Ingwe. The name (singular Vanya) means ‘the Fair’, referring to thegolden hair of the Vanyar; see Finarfin.
Varda The Exalted’, The Lofty’; also called the Lady of the Stars. Greatestof the Valier, the spouse of Manwe, dwelling with him on Taniquetil. Othernames of Varda, as maker of the Stars, were Elbereth, Elentari, Tintalle.Vasa The Consumer’, a name of the Sun among the Noldor.
Vdya One of the Three Rings of the Elves, the Ring of Air, borne by Gil-galad and afterwards by Elrond; also called The Ring of Sapphire.
Vmgilot (In full Quenya form Vmgilote ). Toam-flower’, the name ofEarendil’s ship; see Rothinzil.
Vinyamar The house of Turgon in Nevrast under Mount Taras. The meaningis probably ‘New Dwelling’.
Voronwe The Steadfast’, Elf of Gondolin, the only mariner to survive fromthe seven ships sent into the West after the Nirnaeth Arnoediad; met withTuor at Vinyamar and guided him to Gondolin.
Westernesse See Anadune, Numenor.
White Council The Council of the Wise in the Third Age formed to opposeSauron.
White Mountain See Taniquetil.
White Tree See Telperion, Galathilion, Nimloth (1). The White Trees ofMinas Ithil and Minas Anor.
Wildman of the Woods Name adopted by Turin when he first came amongthe Men of Brethil.
Wilwarin Name of a constellation. The word meant ‘butterfly’ in Quenya,and the constellation was perhaps Cassiopeia.
Wizards See Istari.
Woodland Elves See Silvan Elves.
Yavanna ‘Giver of fruits’; one of the Valier, numbered among the Aratar;the spouse of Aule; called also Kementari.
Year of Lamentation The year of the Nirnaeth Arnoediad.
APPENDIX
ELEMENTS IN QUENYA AND SINDARIN NAMES
These notes have been compiled for those who take an interest in the Eldarinlanguages, and The Lord of the Rings is extensively drawn upon for illustration.They are necessarily very compressed, giving an air of certainty and finality thatis not altogether justified; and they are very selective, this depending both onconsiderations of length and the limitations of the editor’s knowledge. Theheadings are not arranged systematically by roots or in Quenya or Sindarinforms, but somewhat arbitrarily, the aim being to make the component elementsof names as readily identifiable as possible.
adan (plural Edain ) in Adanedhel, Aradan, Dunedain. For its meaning and
history see Atani in the Index.
aelin ‘lake, pool’ in Aelin-uial; cf. lin (I).
aglar ‘glory, brilliance’ in Dagor Aglareb, Aglarond. The form in Quenya,alkar, has transposition of the consonants: to Sindarin aglareb correspondsAlkarinque. The root is kal-‘ shine’, q.v.aina ‘holy’ in Amur, Ainulindale.
alda ‘tree’ (Quenya) in Aldaron, Aldudenie, Malinalda, corresponding toSindarin galadh (seen in Caras Galadhon and the Galadhrim ofLothlorien).
alqua ‘swan’ (Sindarin alph ) in Alqualonde; from a root alak-‘ rushing’occurring also in Ancalagon.
amarth ‘doom’ in Amon Amarth, Cabed Naer amarth,Umarth, and in theSindarin form of Turin’s name ‘Master of Doom’, Turamarth. The Quenyaform of the word appears in Turambar.
amon ‘hill’, a Sindarin word occurring as the first element of many names;plural emyn in Emyn Beraid.
anca ‘jaws’ in Ancalagon (for the second element in this name see alqua).an(d) ‘long’ in Andram, Anduin; also in Anfalas (‘Langstrand’) in Gondor,Cair Andros (‘ship of long-foam’) an island in Anduin, and Angerthas ‘longrune-rows’.
andune ‘sunset, west’ in Andunie, to which corresponds in Sindarin annun,cf. Annuminas, and Henneth Annun ‘window of the sunset’ in Ithilien. Theancient root of these words, ndu, meaning ‘down, from on high’, appearsalso in Quenya numen ‘the way of the sunset, west’ and in Sindarin dun‘west’, cf. Dunedain. Adunaic adun in Adunakhor, Anadune was a loanfrom Eldarin speech.
anga ‘iron’, Sindarin ang, in Angainor, Angband, Anghabar, Anglachel,Angrist, Angrod, Anguirel, Gurthang; angren ‘of iron’ in Angrenost, pluralengrin in Ered Engrin.
anna ‘gift’ in Annatar, Melian, Yavanna; the same stem in Andor ‘Land ofGift’.
annon ‘great door or gate’, plural ennyn, in Annon-in-Gelydh; cf.Morannon the ‘Black Gate’ of Mordor and Sirannon the ‘Gate-stream’ ofMoria.
ar- ‘beside, outside’ (whence Quenya ar ‘and’, Sindarin a), probably inAraman ‘outside Aman’; cf. also (Nirnaeth) Arnoediad ‘(Tears) withoutreckoning’.
ar(a)- ‘high, noble, royal’ appears in a great many names, as Aradan,Aredhel, Argonath, Amor, etc.; extended stem arat- appearing in Aratar,and in arato ‘champion, eminent man’, e.g. Angrod from Angarato andFinrod from Findarato; also aran ‘king’ in Aranruth. Ereinion ‘scion ofkings’ (name of Gil-galad) has the plural of aran; cf. Fornost Erain ‘Nor-bury of the Kings’ in Arnor. The prefix Ar- of the Adunaic names of theKings of Numenor was derived from this.
arien (the Maia of the Sun) is derived from a root as- seen also in Quenyaare ‘sunlight’.
atar ‘father’ in Atanatari (see Atani in Index), Iluvatar.
band ‘prison, duress’ in Angband; from original mbando, of which theQuenya form appears in Mandos (Sindarin Ang-band = QuenyaAngamando ).
bar ‘dwelling’ in Bar-en-Danwedh. The ancient word mbar (Quenya mar,Sindarin bar ) meant the ‘home’ both of persons and of peoples, and thusappears in many place-names, as Brithombar, Dimbar (the first element ofwhich means ‘sad, gloomy’), Eldamar, Val(i)mar, Vmyamar, Marnu-Falmar. Mardil, name of the first of the Ruling Stewards of Gondor, means‘devoted to the house’ (i.e. of the Kings).
barad ‘tower’ in Barad-dur, Barad Eithel, Barad Nimras; the plural inEmyn Beraid.
beleg ‘mighty’ in Beleg, Belegaer, Belegost, Laer Cu Beleg.bragol ‘sudden’ in Dagor Bragollach.
brethil probably means ‘silver birch’; cf. Nimbrethil the birch-woods inArvernien, and Fimbrethil, one of the Entwives.brith ‘gravel’ in Brithiach, Brithombar, Brithon.
(For many names beginning with C see entries under K )
calen (galen) the usual Sindarin word for ‘green’, in Ard-galen, Tol Galen,Calenardhon; also in Parth Galen (‘Green Sward’) beside Anduin andPinnath Gelin (‘Green Ridges’) in Gondor. See kal-.
cam (from kamba ) ‘hand’, but specifically of the hand held cupped in theattitude of receiving or holding, in Camlost, Erchamion.carak- This root is seen in Quenya carca ‘fang’, of which the Sindarinform carch occurs in Carcharoth, and also in Carchost (‘Fang Fort’, one ofthe Towers of the Teeth at the entrance to Mordor). Cf. Caragdur, CarachAngren (‘Iron Jaws’, the rampart and dike guarding the entrance to Udun inMordor), and Helcaraxe.
caran ‘red’, Quenya came, in Caranthir, Carnil, Orocarni; also inCaradhras, from caran-rass, the ‘Red-horn’ in the Misty Mountains, andCarnimirie ‘red-jewelled’, the rowan-tree in Quickbeam’s song. Thetranslation of Carcharoth in the text as ‘Red Maw’ must depend onassociation with this word; see carak-.
celeb ‘silver’ (Quenya telep, telpe, as in Telperion ) in Celeborn,Celebrant, Celebros. Celebrimbor means ‘silver-fist’, from the adjectivecelebrin ‘silver’ (meaning not ‘made of silver’ but ‘like silver, in hue orworth’) and paur (Quenya quare) ‘fist’, often used to mean ‘hand’; theQuenya form of the name was Telperinquar. Celebrindal has celebrin andtal, dal ‘foot’.
coron ‘mound’ in Corollaire (also called Coron Oiolaire, which latterword means ‘Ever-summer’, cf. Oiolosse ); cf. Cerin Amroth, the greatmound in Lothlorien.
cu ‘bow’ in Cuthalion, Dor Cuarthol, Laer Cu Beleg.
cuivie ‘awakening’ in Cuivienen (Sindarin Nen Echui). Other derivatives
of the same root are Dor Firn-i-Guinar; coire, the first beginning of Spring,
Sindarin echuir, The Lord of the Rings Appendix D; and coimas ‘life-
bread’, Quenya name of lembas.
cul- ‘golden-red’ in Culurien.
curu ‘skill’ in Curufin(we), Curunir.
dae ‘shadow’ in Dor Daedeloth, and perhaps in Daeron.
dagor ‘battle’; the root is ndak-, cf. Haudh-en-Ndengin. Another
derivative is Dagnir (Dagnir Glaurunga ‘Glaurung’s Bane’).
del ‘horror’ in Delduwath; deloth ‘abhorrence’ in Dor Daedeloth.
dm ‘silent’ in Dor Dmen; cf. Rath Dmen, the Silent Street in Minas Tirith,
and Amon Dm, one of the beacon-hills of Gondor.
dol ‘head’ in Lorindol; often applied to hills and mountains, as in DolGuldur, Dolmed, Mindolluin (also Nardol, one of the beacon-hills ofGondor, and Fanuidhol, one of the Mountains of Moria).dor ‘land’ (i.e. dry land as opposed to sea) was derived from ndor; itoccurs in many Sindarin names, as Doriath, Dorthonion, Eriador, Gondor,Mordor, etc. In Quenya the stem was blended and confused with a quitedistinct word nore meaning ‘people’; in origin Valinore was strictly ‘thepeople of the Valar’, but Valandor ‘the land of the Valar’, and similarlyNumen(n)ore ‘people of the West’, but Numendor ‘land of the West’.Quenya Endor ‘Middle-earth’ was from ened ‘middle’ and ndor; this inSindarin became Ennor (cf. ennorath ‘middle lands’ in the chant A ElberethGilthoniel ).
draug ‘wolf’ in Draugluin.
du ‘night, dimness’ in Delduwath, Ephel Duath. Derived from earlierdome, whence Quenya lome; thus Sindarin dulin ‘nightingale’ correspondsto lomelinde.
duin ‘(long) river’ in Anduin, Baranduin, Esgalduin, Malduin, Taur-im-Duinath.
dur ‘dark’ in Barad-dur, Caragdur, Dol Guldur; also in Durthang (a castlein Mordor).
ear ‘sea’ (Quenya) in Earendil, Earrame, and many other names. TheSindarin word gaer (in Belegaer ) is apparently derived from the sameoriginal stem.
echor in Echoriath ‘Encircling Mountains’ and Orfalch Echor; cf.Rammas Echor ‘the great wall of the outer circle’ about the Pelennor Fieldsat Minas Tirith.
edhel ‘elf’ (Sindarin) in Adanedhel, Aredhel, Gloredhel, Ost-in-Edhil; alsoin Peredhil ‘Half-elven’.
eithel ‘well’ in Eithel Ivrin, Eithel Sirion, Barad Eithel; also in Mitheithel,the river Hoarwell in Eriador (named from its source). See kel-.el, elen ‘star’. According to Elvish legend, e/e was a primitive exclamation‘behold!’ made by the Elves when they first saw the stars. From this originderived the ancient words el and elen, meaning ‘star’, and the adjectiveselda and elena, meaning ‘of the stars’. These elements appear in a greatmany names. For the later use of the name Eldar see the Index. TheSindarin equivalent of Elda was Edhel (plural Edhil), q.v.; but the strictlycorresponding form was Eledh, which occurs in Eledhwen.
er ‘one, alone’, in Amon Ereb (cf. Erebor, the Lonely Mountain),
Erchamion, Eressea, Eru.
ereg ‘thorn, holly’ in Eregion, Region.
esgal ‘screen, hiding’ in Esgalduin.
falas ‘shore, line of surf’ (Quenya falasse ) in Falas, Belfalas; also Anfalasin Gondor. Cf. Falathar, Falathrim. Another derivative from the root wasQuenya falma ‘(crested) wave’, whence Falmari, Mar-nu-Falmar.faroth is derived from a root meaning ‘hunt, pursue’; in the Lay ofLeithian the Taur-en-Faroth above Nargothrond are called ‘the Hills of theHunters’.
faug- ‘gape’ in Anfauglir, Anfauglith, Dor-nu-Fauglith.
fea ‘spirit’ in Feanor, Feanturi.
fin- ‘hair’ in Finduilas, Fingon, Finrod, Glorfindel.
formen ‘north’ (Quenya) in Formenos; Sindarin forn (also for, forod ) inFornost.
fuin ‘gloom, darkness’ (Quenya huine) in Fuinur, Taur-nu-Fuin.
gaer ‘sea’ in Belegaer (and in Gaerys, Sindarin name of Osse). Said toderive from the stem gaya ‘awe, dread’, and to have been the name madefor the vast and terrifying Great Sea when the Eldar first came to its shores.gaur ‘werewolf’ (from a root ngwaw- ‘howl’) in Tol-in-Gaurhoth.gil ‘star’ in Dagor-nuin-Giliath, Osgiliath (giliath ‘host of stars’); Gil-Estel, Gil-galad.
girith ‘shuddering’ in Nen Girith; cf. also Girithron, name of the last
month of the year in Sindarin ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix D).
glm ‘gleam’ (particularly applied to the eyes) in Maeglin.
golodh is the Sindarin form of Quenya Noldo; see gul. Plural Golodhrim,
and Gelydh (in Annon-in-Gelydh).
gond ‘stone’ in Gondolin, Gondor, Gonnhirrim, Argonath, seregon. Thename of the hidden city of King Turgon was devised by him in Quenya asOndolinde (Quenya ondo = Sindarin gond, and Unde ‘singing, song’); but itwas known always in legend in the Sindarin form Gondolin, which wasprobably interpreted as gond-dolen ‘Hidden Rock’.
gor ‘horror, dread’ in Gorthaur, Gorthol; goroth of the same meaning,with reduplicated gor, in Gorgoroth, Ered Gorgoroth.groth (grod) ‘delving, underground dwelling’ in Menegroth, Nogrod(probably also in Nimrodel, ‘lady of the white cave’). Nogrod wasoriginally Novrod ‘hollow delving’ (hence the translation Hollowbold ), but
was altered under the influence of naug 'dwarf 5 .
gul 'sorcery 5 in Dol Guldur, Minas Morgul. This word was derived from
the same ancient stem ngol- that appears in Noldor; cf. Quenya nole 'long
study, lore, knowledge 5 . But the Sindarin word was darkened in sense by its
frequent use in the compound morgul ‘black arts 5 .
gurth ‘death 5 in Gurthang (see also Melkor in the Index).
gwaith ‘people 5 in Gwaith-i-Mirdain; cf. Enedwaith ‘Middle-folk 5 , name
of the land between the Greyflood and the Isen.
gwath, wath ‘shadow 5 in Delduwath, Ephel Duath; also in Gwathlo, theriver Greyflood in Eriador. Related forms in Ered Wethrin, Thuringwethil.(This Sindarin word referred to dim light, not to the shadows of objects castby light: these were called morchaint ‘dark shapes 5 .)
hadhod in Hadhodrond (translation of Khazad-dum ) was a rendering ofKhazad into Sindarin sounds.
haudh ‘mound 5 in Haudh-en-Arwen, Haudh-en-Elleth, etc.heru ‘lord 5 in Herumor, Herunumen; Sindarin hir in Gonnhirrim,Rohirrim, Barahir; hfril ‘lady 5 in Hirilom.him ‘cool 5 in Himlad (and Himring ?).
hini ‘children 5 in Eruhmi ‘Children of Eru 5 ; Nam i Hin Hurin.
hith ‘mist 5 in Hithaeglir, Hithlum (also in Nen Hithoel, a lake in Anduin).
Hithlum is Sindarin in form, adapted from the Quenya name Hisilome given
by the Noldorin exiles (Quenya hisie ‘mist 5 , cf. Hisime, the name of the
eleventh month of the year, The Lord of the Rings Appendix D).
hoth ‘host, horde 5 (nearly always in a bad sense) in Tol-in-Gaurhoth; also
in Loss(h)oth, the Snowmen of Forochel ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix
A (I, iii)) and Glamhoth ‘din-horde 5 , a name for Ores.
hyarmen ‘south 5 (Quenya) in Hyarmentir, Sindarin har-, ham, harad.
id ‘void, abyss 5 in Moria.iant ‘bridge 5 in Iant laur.lath ‘fence 5 in Doriath.
iaur ‘old 5 in Iant laur; cf. the Elvish name of Bombadil, Iarwain.ilm- This stem appears in Ilmen, Ilmare, and also in Ilmarin (‘mansion ofthe high airs 5 , the dwelling of Manwe and Varda upon Oiolosse).iluve ‘the whole, the all 5 in Iluvatar.
kal- (gal-) This root, meaning ‘shine 5 , appears in Calacirya, Calaquendi,Tar-calion; galvorn, Gil-galad, Galadriel. The last two names have no
connexion with Sindarin galadh ‘tree’, although in the case of Galadrielsuch a connexion was often made, and the name altered to Galadhriel. Inthe High-elven speech her name was Al(a)tariel, derived from alata‘radiance 5 (Sindarin galad ) and riel ‘garlanded maiden 5 (from a root rig-‘twine, wreathe 5 ): the whole meaning ‘maiden crowned with a radiantgarland 5 , referring to her hair, calen (galen) ‘green 5 is etymologically‘bright 5 , and derives from this root; see also aglar.
kano ‘commander 5 : this Quenya word is the origin of the second elementin Fingon and Turgon.
kel- ‘go away 5 , of water ‘flow away, flow down 5 , in Celon; from et-kele‘issue of water, spring 5 was derived, with transposition of the consonants,Quenya ehtele, Sindarin eithel.
kemen ‘earth 5 in Kementari; a Quenya word referring to the earth as a flatfloor beneath menel, the heavens.
khelek- ‘ice 5 in Helcar, Helcaraxe (Quenya helka ‘icy, ice-cold 5 ). But inHelevorn the first element is Sindarin heledh ‘glass 5 , taken from Khuzdulkheled (cf. Kheled-zaram ‘Mirrormere’); Helevorn means ‘black glass 5 (cf.galvorn).
khil- ‘follow 5 in Hildor, Hildorien, Eluchil.
kir- ‘cut, cleave 5 in Calacirya, Cirth, Angerthas, Cirith ( Ninniach,Thoronath ). From the sense ‘pass swiftly through 5 was derived Quenyadry a ‘sharp-prowed ship 5 (cf. English cutter), and this meaning appearsalso in Cirdan, Tar-Ciryatan, and no doubt in the name of Isildur’s sonCiryon.
lad ‘plain, valley 5 in Dagorlad, Himlad; imlad a narrow valley with steepsides, in Imladris (cf. also Imlad Morgul in the Ephel Duath).laure ‘gold 5 (but of light and colour, not of the metal) in Laurelin; theSindarin forms in Gloredhel, Glorfindel, Loeg Ningloron, Lorindol,Rathloriel.
lhach ‘leaping flame 5 in Dagor Bragollach, and probably in Anglachel(the sword made by Eol of meteoritic iron).
lin (1) ‘pool, mere 5 in Linaewen (which contains aew (Quenya aiwe)‘small bird 5 ), Teiglin; cf. aelin.
lin- (2) This root, meaning ‘sing, make a musical sound 5 , occurs inAinulindale, Laurelin, Lindar, Lindon, Ered Lindon, lomelindi.lith ‘ash 5 in Anfauglith, Dor-nu-Fauglith; also in Ered Lithui, the AshenMountains, forming the northern border of Mordor, and Lithlad ‘Plain ofAshes 5 at the feet of Ered Lithui.
lok- 'bend, loop’ in Uruloki (Quenya (h)loke 'snake, serpent’, SindarinIhug).
lom ‘echo’ in Dor-lomin, Ered Lomin; related are Lammoth, LanthirLamath.
lome ‘dusk’ in Lomion, lomelindi; see du.
londe ‘land-locked haven’ in Alqualonde; the Sindarin form lond ( lonn ) inMithlond.
los ‘snow’ in Oiolosse (Quenya oio ‘ever’ and losse ‘snow, snow-white’);Sindarin loss in Amon Uilos and Aeglos.
loth ‘flower’ in Lothlorien, Nimloth; Quenya lote in Ninquelote, Vmgilote.luin ‘blue’ in Ered Luin, Helluin, Luinil, Mindolluin.
maeg ‘sharp, piercing’ (Quenya maika ) in Maeglin.
mal- ‘gold’ in Malduin, Malinalda; also in mallorn, and in the Field ofCormallen, which means ‘golden circle’ and was named from theculumalda trees that grew there (see cul-).
man- ‘good, blessed, unmarred’ in Aman, Manwe; derivatives of Aman inAmandil, Araman,Umanyar.
mel- ‘love’ in Melian (from Melyanna ‘dear gift’); this stem is seen also inthe Sindarin word mellon ‘friend’ in the inscription on the West-gate ofMoria.
men ‘way’ in Numen, Hyarmen, Romen, Formen.
menel ‘the heavens’ in Meneldil, Menelmacar, Meneltarma.
mereth ‘feast’ in Mereth Aderthad; also in Merethrond, the Hall of Feasts
in Minas Tirith.
minas ‘tower’ in Annuminas, Minas Anor, Minas Tirith, etc. The samestem occurs in other words referring to isolated, prominent, things, e.g.Mindolluin, Mindon; probably related is Quenya minya ‘first’ (cf. Tar-Minyatur, the name of Elros as first King of Numenor).mir ‘jewel’ (Quenya mire) in Elemmrre, Gwaith-i-Mirdain, Miriel,Nauglamir, Tar-Atanamir.
mith ‘grey’ in Mithlond, Mithrandir, Mithrim; also in Mitheithel, the riverHoarwell in Eriador.
mor ‘dark’ in Mordor, Morgoth, Moria, Moriquendi, Mormegil, Morwen,etc.
moth ‘dusk’ in Nan Elmoth.
nan(d) ‘valley’ in Nan Dungortheb, Nan Elmoth, Nan Tathren.
nar ‘fire’ in Narsil, Narya; present also in the original forms of Aegnor
(Aikanaro ‘Sharp Flame’ or ‘Fell Fire’) and Feanor (Feanaro ‘Spirit ofFire’). The Sindarin form was naur, as in Sammath Naur, the Chambers ofFire in Orodruin. Derived from the same ancient root (a)nar was the nameof the Sun, Quenya Anar (also in Anarion ), Sindarin Anor (cf. Minas Anor,Anorien ).
naug ‘dwarf’ in Naugrim; see also Nogrod in entry groth. Related isanother Sindarin word for ‘dwarf’, nogoth, plural noegyth (Noegyth Nibin‘Petty-dwarves’) and nogothrim.
-(n)dil is a very frequent ending of personal names, Amandil, Earendil(shortened Earnil ), Elendil, Mardil, etc.; it implies ‘devotion’, ‘disinterestedlove’ (see Mardil in entry bar).
-(n)dur in names such as Earendur (shortened Earnur) is similar inmeaning to -(n)dil.
neldor ‘beech’ in Neldoreth; but it seems that this was properly the nameof Hirilorn, the great beech-tree with three trunks ( nelde ‘three’ and orn).nen ‘water’, used of lakes, pools, and lesser rivers, in Nen Girith, Nenning,Nenuial, Nenya; Cuivienen, Uinen; also in many names in The Lord of theRings, as Nen Hithoel, Bruinen, Emyn Amen, Nurnen. Nin ‘wet’ in LoegNingloron; also in Nindalf.
nim ‘white’ (from earlier nimf, nimp ) in Nimbrethil, Nimloth, Nimphelos,niphredil (niphred ‘pallor’), Barad Nimras, Ered Nimrais. The Quenyaform was ninque; thus Ninquelote = Nimloth. Cf. also Taniquetil.
orn ‘tree’ in Celeborn, Hirilorn; cf. Fangorn ‘Treebeard’, and mallorn,plural mellyrn, the trees of Lothlorien.
orod ‘mountain’ in Orodruin, Thangorodrim; Orocarni, Oromet. Pluralered in Ered Engrin, Ered Lindon, etc.
os(t) ‘fortress’ in Angrenost, Belegost, Formenos, Fornost, Mandos,Nargothrond (from Narog-ost-rond ), Os(t)giliath, Ost-in-Edhil.
palan (Quenya) ‘far and wide’ in palantiri, Tar-Palantir.pel- ‘go round, encircle’ in Pelargir, Pelori, and in the Pelennor, the‘fenced land’ of Minas Tirith; also in Ephel Brandir, Ephel Duath (ephelfrom et-pel ‘outer fence’).
quen- (quet-) ‘say, speak’ in Quendi ( Calaquendi, Laiquendi, Moriquendi),Quenya, Valaquenta, Quenta Silmarillion. The Sindarin forms have p (or b )for qu; e.g. pedo ‘speak’ in the inscription on the West-gate of Moria,corresponding to the Quenya stem quet-, and Gandalf’s words before the
gate, lasto beth lammen ‘listen to the words of my tongue’, where beth‘word’ corresponds to Quenya quetta.
ram ‘wall’ (Quenya ramba) in Andram, Ramdal; also in Rammas Echor,the wall about the Pelennor Fields at Minas Tirith.
ran- ‘wander, stray’ in Rana, the Moon, and in Mithrandir, Aerandir; alsoin the river Gilraen in Gondor.
rant ‘course’ in the river-names Adurant (with adu ‘double’) andCelebrant (‘Silverlode’).
ras ‘horn’ in Barad Nimras, also in Caradhras (‘Redhorn’) and Methedras(‘Last Peak’) in the Misty Mountains; plural rais in Ered Nimrais.rauko ‘demon’ in Valaraukar; Sindarin raug, rog in Balrog.ril ‘brilliance’ in Idril, Silmaril; also in Anduril (the sword of Aragorn) andin mithril (Moria-silver). Idril’s name in Quenya form was Itarille (orItarilde), from a stem ita-‘ sparkle’.
rim ‘great number, host’ (Quenya rimbe) was commonly used to formcollective plurals, as Golodhrim, Mithrim (see the Index), Naugrim,Thangorodrim, etc.
ring ‘cold, chill’ in Ringil, Ringwil, Himring; also in the river Ringlo inGondor, and in Ringare, Quenya name of the last month of the year ( TheLord of the Rings Appendix D).
ris ‘cleave’ appears to have blended with the stem kris- of similar meaning(a derivative of the root kir- ‘cleave, cut’, q.v.); hence Angrist (also Orcrist‘Orc-cleaver’, the sword of Thorin Oakenshield), Crissaegrim, Imladris.roch ‘horse’ (Quenya rokko) in Rochallor, Rohan (from Rochand ‘land ofhorses’), Rohirrim; also in Roheryn ‘horse of the lady’ (cf. heru), Aragorn’shorse, which was so called because given to him by Arwen ( The Return ofthe King V 2).
rom- A stem used of the sound of trumpets and horns which appears inOrome and Valaroma; cf. Bema, the name of this Vala in the language ofRohan as translated into Anglo-Saxon in The Lord of the Rings Appendix A(II): Anglo-Saxon beme ‘trumpet’.
romen ‘uprising, sunrise, east’ (Quenya) in Romenna. The Sindarin wordsfor ‘east’, rhun (in Talath Rhunen ) and amrun, were of the same origin.rond meant a vaulted or arched roof, or a large hall or chamber so roofed;so Nargothrond (see ost ), Hadhodrond, Aglarond. It could be applied to theheavens, hence the name Elrond ‘star-dome’.
ros ‘foam, spindrift, spray’ in Celebros, Elros, Rauros; also in CairAndros, an island in the river Anduin.
ruin ‘red flame’ (Quenya runya ) in Orodruin.ruth ‘anger’ in Aranruth.
sarn ‘(small) stone’ in Sam Athrad (Sam Ford on the Brandywine is ahalf-translation of this); also in Sam Gebir (‘stone-spikes’: ceber, pluralcebir ‘stakes’), rapids in the river Anduin. A derivative is Semi, a river inGondor.
sereg ‘blood’ (Quenya serke ) in seregon.
sil- (and variant th/7-) ‘shine (with white or silver light)’ in Belthil,Galathilion, Silpion, and in Quenya Isil, Sindarin Ithil, the Moon (whenceIsildur, Narsil; Minas Ithil, Ithilien). The Quenya word Silmarilli is said toderive from the name silima that Feanor gave to the substance from whichthey were made.
sir ‘river’, from root sir- ‘flow’, in Ossiriand (the first element is from thestem of the numeral ‘seven’, Quenya otso, Sindarin odo ), Sirion; also inSirannon (the ‘Gate-stream’ of Moria) and Sirith (‘a flowing’, as tirith‘watching’ from tir), a river in Gondor. With change of s to h in the middleof words it is present in Minhiriath ‘between the rivers’, the region betweenthe Brandywine and the Greyflood; in Nanduhirion ‘vale of dim streams’,the Dimrill Dale (see nan(d) and du); and in Ethir Anduin, the outflow ordelta of Anduin (from et-sir ).
sul ‘wind’ in Amon Sul, Sulimo; cf. Sulime, Quenya name of the thirdmonth of the year ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix D).
tal (dal) ‘foot’ in Celebrindal, and with the meaning ‘end’ in Ramdal.
talath ‘flat lands, plain’ in Talath Dirnen, Talath Rhunen.
tar- ‘high’ (Quenya tara ‘lofty’), prefix of the Quenya names of the
Numenorean Kings; also in Annatar. Feminine tari ‘she that is high, Queen’
in Elentari, Kementari. Cf. tarma ‘pillar’ in Meneltarma.
tathar ‘willow’; adjective tathren in Nan-tathren; Quenya tasare in
Tasarinan, Nan-tasarion (see Nan-tathren in the Index).
taur ‘wood, forest’ (Quenya taure ) in Tauron, Taur-im-Duinath, Taur-nu-
Fuin.
tel- ‘finish, end, be last’ in Teleri.
thalion ‘strong, dauntless’ in Cuthalion, Thalion.
thang ‘oppression’ in Thangorodrim, also in Durthang (a castle inMordor). Quenya sanga meant ‘press, throng’, whence Sangahyando‘Throng-cleaver’, name of a man in Gondor ( The Lord of the RingsAppendix A (I, iv)).
thar- ‘athwart, across’ in Sam Athrad, Thargelion; also in Tharbad (fromthara-pata ‘crossway’) where the ancient road from Arnor and Gondorcrossed the Greyflood.
thaur ‘abominable, abhorrent’ in Sauron (from Thauron), Gorthaur.thin(d) ‘grey’ in Thingol; Quenya sinda in Sindar, Singollo ( Sindacollo :collo ‘cloak’).
thol ‘helm’ in Dor Cuarthol, Gorthol.thon ‘pine-tree’ in Dorthonion.
thoron ‘eagle’ in Thorondor (Quenya Sorontar ), CirithThoronath. TheQuenya form is perhaps present in the constellation-name Soronume.til ‘point, horn’ in Taniquetil, Tilion (‘the Horned’); also in Celebdil‘Silvertine’, one of the Mountains of Moria.
tin- ‘sparkle’ (Quenya tinta ‘cause to sparkle’, tinwe ‘spark’) in Tintalle;also in tindome ‘starry twilight’ ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix D),whence tindomerel ‘daughter of the twilight’, a poetic name for thenightingale (Sindarin Tinuviel). It appears also in Sindarin ithildin‘starmoon’, the substance of which the devices on the West-gate of Moriawere made.
tir ‘watch, watch over’ in Minas Tirith, palantiri, Tar-Palantir, Tirion.tol ‘isle’ (rising with sheer sides from the sea or from a river) in TolEressea, Tol Galen, etc.
turn ‘valley’ in Tumhalad, Tumladen; Quenya tumbo (cf. Tree-beard’stumbalemorna ‘black deep valley’, The Two Towers III 4). Cf. Utumno,Sindarin Udun (Gandalf in Moria named the Balrog ‘Flame of Udun’), aname afterwards used of the deep dale in Mordor between the Morannonand the Isenmouthe.
tur ‘power, mastery’ in Turambar, Turgon, Turin, Feanturi, Tar-Minyatur .uial ‘twilight’ in Aelin-uial, Nenuial.
ur- ‘heat, be hot’ in Uroloki; cf. Urime and Urui, Quenya and Sindarinnames of the eighth month of the year ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix D).Related is the Quenya word aure ‘sunlight, day’ (cf. Fingon’s cry before theNirnaeth Arnoediad), Sindarin aur, which in the form Or- is prefixed to thenames of the days of the week.
val- ‘power’ in Valar, Valacirca, Valaquenta, Valaraukar, Val(i)-mar,Valinor. The original stem was bal-, preserved in Sindarin Balan, pluralBelain, the Valar, and in Balrog.
wen ‘maiden’ is a frequent ending, as in Earwen, Morwen.
wing ‘foam, spray’ in Elwing, Vmgelot (and only in these two names).
yave ‘fruit’ (Quenya) in Yavanna; cf. Yavannie, Quenya name of the ninthmonth of the year, and yavie ‘autumn’ ( The Lord of the Rings Appendix D).
MAPS
gp§§|gl
HSi
IBitWlil vl
, t ’- nl_J | K
m
plllll
»; ~« : HBHI ■
m
nr
WORKS BY J.R.R. TOLKIEN
The HobbitLeaf by NiggleOn Fairy-StoriesFarmer Giles of HamThe Homecoming of BeorhtnothThe Lord of the RingsThe Adventures of Tom BombadilThe Road Goes Ever On (with Donald Swann)Smith of Wootton Major
WORKS PUBLISHED POSTHUMOUSLY
Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Pearl and Sir OrfeoThe Father Christmas LettersThe SilmarillionPictures by J.R.R. TolkienUnfinished TalesThe Letters of J.R.R. TolkienFinn and HengestMr Bliss
The Monsters and the Critics & Other EssaysRoverandomThe Children of HurinThe Legend of Sigurd and Gudrun
THE HISTORY OF MIDDLE-EARTH - BY CHRISTOPHER TOLKIEN
I The Book of Lost Tales, Part One
II The Book of Lost Tales, Part Two
III The Lays of BeleriandIV The Shaping of Middle-earthV The Lost Road and Other Writings
VI The Return of the Shadow
VII The Treason of IsengardVIII The War of the Ring
IX Sauron Defeated
X Morgoth’s RingXI The War of the Jewels
XII The Peoples of Middle-earth
COPYRIGHT
HarperCollinsPub/z'shers77-85 Fulham Palace Road,Hammersmith, London w6 8 j Bwww.tolkien.co.uk
This paperback edition 199946
First published in Great Britain byGeorge Allen & Unwin 1977First paperback edition 1979
Copyright © The J.R.R. Tolkien Copyright Trust and C.R. Tolkien 1977
and ‘Tolkien’® are registered trademarks of The J.R.R. Tolkien Estate
Limited
ISBN 0 261 10273 7
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American CopyrightConventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the non¬exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on¬screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded,decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any informationstorage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic ormechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written
permission of HarperCollins e-books.
Mobipocket Reader © April 2009 ISBN: 978-0-06-192763-8
ml HarperCollins e-booksABOUT THE PUBLISHER
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australiahttp://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Canada2 Bloor Street East - 20th FloorToronto, ON, M4W, 1A8, Canadahttp://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) LimitedP.O. Box 1 Auckland,
New Zealand
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace RoadLondon, W6 8JB, UKhttp://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com
Though I have thought about them a good deal.
* It is, I suppose, fundamentally concerned with the problem of the relation ofArt (and Sub-creation) and Primary Reality.
* Not in the Beginner of Evil: his was a sub-creative Fall, and hence the Elves(the representatives of sub-creation par excellence) were peculiarly his enemies,and the special object of his desire and hate - and open to his deceits. Their Fallis into possessiveness and (to a less degree) into perversion of their art to power.
* As far as all this has symbolical or allegorical significance, Light is such aprimeval symbol in the nature of the Universe, that it can hardly be analysed.The Light of Valinor (derived from light before any fall) is the light of artundivorced from reason, that sees things both scientifically (or philosophically)and imaginatively (or sub-creatively) and says that they are good - as beautiful.The Light of Sun (or Moon) is derived from the Trees only after they weresullied by Evil.
* Of course in reality this only means that my ‘elves’ are only a representationor an apprehension of a part of human nature, but that is not the legendary modeof talking.
* [Some words of the original manuscript were omitted by the typist in thissentence.]
* Elrond symbolises throughout the ancient wisdom, and his House representsLore - the preservation in reverent memory of all tradition concerning the good,wise, and beautiful. It is not a scene of action but of reflection. Thus it is a placevisited on the way to all deeds, or 'adventures’. It may prove to be on the directroad (as in The Hobbit ); but it may be necessary to go from there in a totallyunexpected course. So necessarily in The Lord of the Rings, having escaped toElrond from the imminent pursuit of present evil, the hero departs in a whollynew direction: to go and face it at its source.
* The view is taken (as clearly reappears later in the case of the Hobbits thathave the Ring for a while) that each ‘Kind’ has a natural span, integral to itsbiological and spiritual nature. This cannot really be increased qualitatively orquantitatively; so that prolongation in time is like stretching a wire out evertauter, or ‘spreading butter ever thinner’ it becomes an intolerable torment.
i [When this letter was written the original history of the rulers of Numenor,whereby Tar-Calion (Ar-Pharazon) was the thirteenth and not as afterwards thetwenty-fifth, was still present.]
The Silmarillion is an account of the Elder Days, or the First Age of Tolkien’sWorld. It is the ancient drama to which the characters in The Lord of the Ringslook back, and in whose events some of them, such as Elrond and Galadriel,took part. The tales of The Silmarillion are set in an age when Morgoth, the firstDark Lord, dwelt in Middle-earth, and the High Elves made war upon him forthe recovery of the Silmarils.
The three Silmarils were jewels created by Feanor, most gifted of the Elves.Within them were imprisoned the Light of the Two Trees of Valinor before theTrees themselves were destroyed by Morgoth. Thereafter the unsullied Light ofValinor lived on only in the Silmarils; but they were seized by Morgoth and setin his crown, guarded in the fortress of Angband in the north of Middle-earth.
The Silmarillion is the history of the rebellion of Feanor and his kindredagainst the gods, their exile from Valinor and return to Middle-earth and theirwar, hopeless despite their heroism, against the great Enemy. Included in thebook are several shorter works. The Ainulindale is a myth of the Creation and inthe Valaquenta the nature and powers of each of the gods is described. TheAkallabeth recounts the downfall of the great island kingdom of Numenor at theend of the Second Age and Of the Rings of Power tells of the great events at theend of the Third Age, which are narrated in The Lord of the Rings.
Table of Contents
J.R.R. TOLKIEN
TITLE PAGE
FOREWORD
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
FROM A LETTER BY J.R.R. TOLKIEN TO MILTON WALDMAN. 1951
AINUL INDALE
VALAOUENTA
OUENTA SILMARILLION
CHAPTER 1: OF THE BEGINNING OF DAYS
CHAPTER 2: OF AULE AND YAVANNA
CHAPTER 3: OF THE COMING OF THE ELVES AND THE CAPTIVITY OF
MELKOR
CHAPTER 4: OF THINGOL AND MELIAN
CHAPTER 5: OF ELDAMAR AND THE PRINCES OF THE ELDALIE
CHAPTER 6: OF FEANOR AND THE UNCHAINING OF MELKOR
CHAPTER 7: OF THE SILMARILS AND THE UNREST OF THE NOLDOR
CHAPTER 8: OF THE DARKENING OF VALINOR
CHAPTER 9: OF THE FLIGHT OF THE NOLDOR
CHAPTER 10: OF THE SINDAR
CHAPTER 11: OF THE SUN AND MOON AND THE HIDING OF VALINOR
CHAPTER 12: OF MEN
CHAPTER 13: OF THE RETURN OF THE NOLDOR
CHAPTER 14: OF BELERIAND AND ITS REALMS
CHAPTER 15: OF THE NOLDOR IN BELERIAND
CHAPTER 16: OF MAEGLIN
CHAPTER 17: OF THE COMING OF MEN INTO THE WEST
CHAPTER 18: OF THE RUIN OF BELERIAND AND THE FALL OF
FINGOLFIN
CHAPTER 19: OF BEREN AND LUTHIEN
CHAPTER 20: OF THE FIFTH BATTLE: NIRNAETH ARNOEDIAD
CHAPTER 21: OF TURIN TURAMBAR
CHAPTER 22: OF THE RUIN OF DORIATH
CHAPTER 23: OF TUOR AND THE FALL OF GONDOLIN
CHAPTER 24: OF THE VOYAGE OF EARENDIL AND THE WAR OF
WRATH
AKALLABETH
OF THE RINGS OF POWER AND THE THIRD AGE
NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION
INDEX OF NAMES
APPENDIX
MAPS
WORKS BY J.R.R. TOLKIEN
